ANNE MACDONALD
IN CLEAR WORDS
THE PRASANNAPADĀ, CHAPTER ONEÖSTERREICHISCHE AKADEMIE DER WISSENSCHAFTEN
PHILOSOPHISCH-HISTORISCHE KLASSE
SITZUNGSBERICHTE, 863. BAND
BEITRÄGE ZUR KULTUR- UND GEISTESGESCHICHTE ASIENS
NR. 86ÖSTERREICHISCHE AKADEMIE DER WISSENSCHAFTEN
PHILOSOPHISCH-HISTORISCHE KLASSE
SITZUNGSBERICHTE, 863. BAND
In Clear Words
The Prasannapadā, Chapter One
Vol. II
Annotated Translation, Tibetan Text
Anne MacDonald
Verlag der
Österreichischen Akademie
der Wissenschaften
Wien 2015
11011
^888.
10001
ÃÒÒÀ
OAWVorgelegt von w. M. ERNST STEINKELLNER
in der Sitzung vom 24. Oktober 2014
Diese Publikation wurde einem anonymen, internationalen
Peer-Review-Verfahren unterzogen.
This publication has undergone the process of anonymous, international peer review.
Die verwendete Papiersorte ist aus chlorfrei gebleichtem Zellstoff hergestellt,
frei von säurebildenden Bestandteilen und alterungsbeständig.
Alle Rechte vorbehalten.
ISBN 978-3-7001-7673-2
Copyright © 2015 by
Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Wien
Druck und Bindung: Ferdinand Berger & Söhne Ges.m.b.H., 3580 Horn
Printed and bound in the EU
http://hw.oeaw.ac.at/7673-2
http://verlag.oeaw.ac.atA Note on the Title
Translation
Appendices to the Translation
Tibetan Text
Introduction
Critical Edition
Bibliography
Contents
Indices
1
5
349
381
383
387
501
551Prasannapadā madhyamakavṛtti
A Commentary on the Madhyamaka[-śāstra]
In Clear Words
Pratyayaparīkṣā nāma prathamam prakaraṇam
Chapter One: Examination of Conditions
A Note on the Title
The Sanskrit titles for Candrakīrti's MMK commentary and its
chapters occur only at the end of each chapter in the respective
manuscript colophons. The text of the PsP in Tibetan translation as
found in the four Tanjur xylograph editions and in the Golden Tanjur
manuscript is preceded, in accord with the general convention for
translated texts, by a Sanskrit title transcribed in Tibetan characters
followed by a Tibetan translation of the title. The Peking and
Narthang editions of the PSP as well as the Golden Tanjur manuscript
give the Sanskrit title as "mulamadhyamikavṛtti prasannapada" ([sic]
Derge and Cone attest mulamadhyāmikaᵒ).¹ It is well known that the
oldest Tibetan translations, i.e., those from Dunhuang and the works
mentioned in the 1Dan dkar ma catalogue, lacked Sanskrit titles and
¹ Title (P, N, G): rgya gar skad du | mu la mā dhya mi ka vṛtti pra sanna pa da nā ma |
bod skad du | dbu ma rtsa ba'i 'grel pa tshig gsal ba zhes bya ba |. Cp. this title to that
at the beginning of the stand-alone MMK as found in the Peking Tanjur: prajñā nāma
mūlamādhyamakakārikā; Derge reads ᵒmadhyāmakakārika. It is unlikely that Nā-
gārjuna applied this or a similar title to his work; see Vetter 1982: 100f.; Seyfort
Ruegg 1981: 1, n. 3.2
that later Tibetan redactors re-sanskritized many of the titles.²
Whereas the individual PsP Tib chapter-colophons refer to Candra-
kīrti's work only as "tshig gsal ba," the final colophon characterizes
it as "bstan bcos dbu ma rtsa ba'i 'grel pa tshig gsal ba." De La
Vallée Poussin places the Peking/Narthang version of the Sanskrit
title (omitting mula) at the beginning of his Sanskrit edition of the
PSP, but in the first note in his “Additions et Corrections,” he corrects
the title from Madhyamikavṛtti to Madhyamakavṛtti.³
Stcherbatsky, obviously alluding to the difficulties he experienced
when translating the first chapter of the PsP, states that Candrakīrti
has titled his commentary "The Clear-worded" "probably not without
some dose of irony, since, as Prof. Wassilieff attests, its extreme
dialectical subtlety, especially in the first chapter, is equalled by no
other work in the whole domain of northern Buddhist literature."4
Hopkins asserts, "It strikes me that Chandrakīrti gave his com-
mentary on Nāgārjuna's Treatise on the Middle Way (Madhyamaka-
shastra) this title in contrast to Bhāvaviveka's commentary, Lamp for
(Nagarjuna's) 'Wisdom' (Prajñāpradīpa) which, due to its brevity
and lack of elaboration, is often difficult to fathom and thus unclear."5
His brief comment on his own translation choice, viz., "Prasanna-
padā is translated as Clear Words though it would be just as suitable
as The Lucidly Worded, or The Clear Worded as Stcherbatsky does in
his The Conception of Buddhist Nirvana ... or Lucid Exposition of the
Middle Way as Mervyn Sprung does in his condensation of the text"
may (excepting Sprung's title) hold as far as the Tibetan translation
of the title is concerned, but the Sanskrit chapter-colophons of all the
PsP manuscripts consistently understand "prasannapadā," i.e., a
bahuvrīhi, and not a karmadhāraya as Hopkins' preferred translation
would assume. For example, the first-chapter colophon in the palm-
leaf manuscripts reads ācāryacandrakīrtipādoparacitāyām prasanna-
2
Cf., e.g., Erb 1990: xliv; 106, n. 2.
³ Cf. PsP₁ 1, n. 1 and PsP₁ 595.
L
4
Stcherbatsky 1927: 67, n. 1.
Hopkins 1983: 845, n. 496.
6 Ibid., 845, n. 496.
TRANSLATION
5PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
padāyām madhyamakavṛttau pratyayaparīkṣā nāma prathamam
prakaraṇam samāptam." David Seyfort Ruegg therefore renders the
title as the "Clear-Worded Commentary on the Madhyamaka-
[kārikās]," while Jacques May paraphrases it as “Commentaire (vṛtti)
au Traité du milieu, rédigé en termes (pada) clairs ou limpides
(prasanna)." My own rendering of Candrakīrti's title prasannapadā
as "In Clear Words" attempts to improve upon the more clumsy "The
Clear(ly) Worded" while still retaining the sense of the bahuvrihi;
that is, the reference is to a commentary which has been composed in
clear words.
3
All of the Sanskrit manuscripts, with the exception of ms P whose
first folio has been lost, commence with a short statement of homage.
The object of homage for manuscripts A through M is the Buddha
and that for manuscript N Vajrasattva and the Three Jewels. Ms Q's
damage has left only ddhaya intact, suggesting that its object of
homage was also the Buddha. De La Vallée Poussin has added in
square brackets after his edition's Sanskrit chapter title the salutation
āryamañjuśriye kumārabhūtāya namaḥ, taken over from the Tibetan
translation, which immediately following the work's main title pre-
sents the words 'phags pa 'jam dpal gzhon nur gyur pa la phyag
'tshal lo, "Homage to noble Mañjuśrī-Kumārabhūta." An identical
statement of homage is found antecedent to the main Tibetan text of,
for example, the MA, the MABh and the YȘ, works also translated by
Pa tshab nyi ma grags, and occurs as part of the homage at the begin-
ning of, for example, MMK, and the Tibetan translations of BP and
PP. The less frequently occurring homage to Jñānasattva-Mañjuśrī
('Jam dpal ye shes sems dpa') occurs in two related texts that were
translated by Ye shes sde, namely, Candrakīrti's YSV and the SSV
attributed to Nāgārjuna.¹º Erb notes that in forty of the approximately
two hundred and forty-seven works Ye shes sde was involved with in
his function as a translator, Mañjuśrī is honoured, as here at the
9
7 I have corrected ms P's and Q's minor scribal errors.
8
Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 3.
May 1959: 5.
10
On YSV's title, see Scherrer-Schaub 1991: 101, n. 1.4
TRANSLATION
commencement of PsP Tib, as Kumārabhūta, and that only the two
works just mentioned, the YSV and the SSV, contain an homage
directed toward Mañjuśrī in his aspect of Jñanasattva.¹¹ Seyfort
Ruegg, referring to the invocation of Mañjuśrī-Kumārabhūta that
appears at the beginning of the Dharmadhātustava, writes that
according to Tsong kha pa and Gung thang dkon mchog bstan pa'i
sgron me, homage to Mañjuśrī-Kumārabhūta serves to indicate a
work's belonging to the category of śāstra connected with the
Abhidharma in a broad sense, that is, to the treatises related to prajñā,
of which Manjusrī is the master. ¹2
12
11 Erb 1990: 106f., n. 3.
12 Seyfort Ruegg 1971: 464, quoted in Scherrer-Schaub 1991: 101, n. 1. See also Erb
1990: 106, n. 3. De La Vallée Poussin (La Vallée Poussin 1907: 251, n. 1) notes in
his MABh translation that the ninth bhūmi is that of the kumārabhūta, the “royal
prince," and the tenth that of the (bodhisattva) princes associated with royal power
("yuvarāja”), but in his Hastings article "Bodhisattva" (La Vallée Poussin 1909:
747f.) he connects the eighth bhūmi with the kumārabhūta and the ninth with the
"yauvarāja." In RĀ V.55ab the kumārabhūta is assigned to the eighth bhūmi. On
Mañjuśrī-Kumārabhūta, see also Lamotte 1960: 2, 14, n. 38 and Hirakawa 1990:
291-293, 304. Dayal (1978: 46-47) refers briefly to this form of Mañjuśrī.Translation§1. After paying obeisance to Nāgārjuna,¹³ to the one
13
whose abode (vāsa) is free of the odour (āvāsa)¹4 of the pair of
extremes (antadvaya), ¹5
15
13.
*LȚ's author commences his text by explaining the name ‘Nāgārjuna’ as a karma-
dhāraya: nāgaś cāsau śuklatvād arjunaś ceti nāgārjunaḥ śeṣo nāgaḥ sa iva nāgārjuno
['lpi |. "This [one] is a nāga and, because of being white/bright, also arjuna; thus,
‘Nāgārjuna,’ i.e., the nāga [called] Śeṣa. Nāgārjuna for his part is like this [nāga].”
(Adi)Śeṣa (also known as Ananta), often praised as the sovereign of the nāgas, is said
in the Rāmāyaṇa to be "white like the moon" (cf. Vogel 1926: 198). Vogel (ibid.)
writes, "The poets of the classical period ... refer in particular to the white colour of
his body and to the amazing splendour of the jewels shining in his thousand heads."
These jewels adorning Seșa's heads illumine the nether realms; on Śeșa, see, e.g.,
Vogel 1926: 25, 57, 192-198. Shortly after this explication of the name Nāgārjuna in
the *LT, an alternative karmadhāraya explanation is presented: atha vā arjunaḥ
pāṇḍavaḥ | nāgaḥ śreṣṭhaḥ | arjunāt śreṣṭho Nāgārjunaḥ| (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 120,
128 [fol. 1b1-2]). “Or, arjuna is [the] Pāṇḍava [brother]. nāga is the best. [The one
who is] superior to arjuna is Nāgārjuna” (thus, Nāgārjuna means the "superior
Arjuna"). See also the explanation of the name Nāgārjuna that is based directly on
the introductory verses in the PSP as recorded by Bu ston in Obermiller 1932: II, 128.
¹4 De La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 1, n. 4) points out that āvāsa appears in place of vāsa
due to the exigencies of the metre. The Tibetan, on the other hand, translates āvāsa as
gnas (cf. also PSP₁ 595 for Page 1, ligne 4). The Tibetan thus presents mtha' gnyis
gnas la gnas bsal for antadvayāvāsavidhūtavāsaḥ, and apparently in reliance on this
translation Stcherbatsky (1927: 81) translates, “who has done away with all recourse
to the abode of Duality."
¹5 The *LȚ explains antadvaya of these initial verses as referring to the extremes of
eternity and annihilation: antadvayam śāśvatocchedau (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 120, 128
[fol. 1b1]; as Yonezawa indicates, the *LȚ incorrectly attests ... śāśvatecchedai |; see
also PsP₁ 1, n. 2 and PsP₁ 595 for Page 1, note 4; La Vallée Poussin 1933: 30-33).
The YSV homage verse refers to the YȘ as that in/by which the pair of extremes is
refuted (Skt in YṢVed 19, n. 4: nirākṛtāntadvayayuktiṣaṣṭikām; YṢV Tib: mtha' gnyis
sel ba'i rigs pa drug cu pa). In Candrakīrti's commentary following the YȘV homage
verse, he refers to the extremes of arising and perishing, and of existence and non-
existence (skye ba dang jig pa dang yod pa dang med pa’i mthar [YȘVed 20.11-12]);
see also YSV 102, n. 3. At PsP₁ 135.10 and 270.11-12 he cites astīti nāstīti ubhe 'pi
antā śuddhī aśuddhīti ime 'pi antā from the Samādhirājasūtra (verse 9.27ab), and at
PSP₁ 270.7-9 he cites astīti kāśyapa ayam eko 'nto nāstīti kāśyapa ayam eko ’ntaḥ
from the KP (see Staël-Holstein 1977: 90). At PsP₁ 393.9-12 he rejects the antadvaya
which consists in existence and non-existence (sattvāsattva) (PsP₁ 495.3-8 āstitā and
tr8
TRANSLATION
who attained birth in the ocean of mind (dhi) of the completely
awakened one(s) (sambuddha),'
16
who imparted, out of compassion, the depths of the water¹7 of the
true Dharma exactly as [he] had understood it, 18
whose flames of the [correct] view (darśana)¹9 consume even
today the kindling of opponents' doctrines (mata) and the mental
darkness of the world, 20
20
whose host of arrows, [his] words of unparalleled wisdom,
destroy the entire army of the enemy, existence (bhava),²¹ [and]
nāstitā; PsP₁ 508.13 bhāvābhāva). Candrakīrti does not refer back to the words of the
initial verses in the commentary which follows.
16 *LT's author glosses sambuddhadhī with bodhicitta (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 120, 128
[fol. 1b1]).
¹7 All of the Sanskrit manuscripts attest toyasya. Stcherbatsky (1927: 81 and n. 3),
following PsP Tib (dam chos mdzod kyi zab mo nyid), emends toyasya to kośasya; he
translates, "Who mercifully has explained the deeper meaning of the treasury of the
religion, according to his own conceptions of it." Thurman (1991: 22) and Loizzo
(2007: 41 and 42, n. 49) both present the Sanskrit as reading toyasya but translate
Tibetan mdzod "treasury." The Tibetan translators probably read koṣasya. The
reading koșasya does not fit as well as toyasya in a verse focussed on water imagery
(in verse 2 fire metaphors are used, and in verse 3, battle imagery). It is also some-
what unusual to speak of the depth of a treasury or of a treasure. De La Vallée
Poussin (PSP₁ 595) points to Așța 229.22-26 for its reference to dharmakoṣa; there
the word akṣaya qualifies dharmakosa.
18 The metre for this initial verse is upajāti, a mixture of indravajrā and
upendravajrā. The first three quarters are in indravajrā and the last in upendravajrā.
19 *LT's author glosses darśana with śūnyatādṛṣṭi (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 120, 128 [fol.
1b1]). Both darśana and dṛṣṭi are more commonly used in a Madhyamaka context to
refer to soteriologically harmful theories/views/speculation; note, however, that
Candrakīrti does refer to his own system/view as madhyamakadarśana (tad evam
madhyamakadarśana evāstitvanāstitvadvayadarśanasyāprasango na vijñānavādiṣv iti
vijñeyam [PSP 275.4-5]). On darśana, see Halbfass 1988: 263-273.
20 The second verse is composed in (pathyā) anuṣṭubh.
21 Stcherbatsky (1927: 81) freely translates nighnanti niḥśeṣabhavārisenām as
"completely destroy the army of our foes (and deliver us from the bonds of phenom-
enal) existence,” a translation that obfuscates the metaphor (rūpaka) “bhavāri."
*LT's author explains: bhavaḥ samsāraḥ sa evāris tasya senā mārādayaḥ (cf.
Yonezawa 2004: 120, 128 [fol. 1b2]). See also de La Vallée Poussin's comments at
PSP₁2, n. 1.9
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
assume sovereign majesty (rājyaśrī)²² in the kingdom of the three
realms23 for persons to be educated (vineya) and the gods, 24
I shall compose a commentary for his kārikās which is laced with
sentences apparent [in their meaning] (uttana)25 and well-
fashioned (satprakriya),26 [one] undisturbed by the winds²7 of
reasoning (tarka), calm and clear (prasanna).28
22 *LT's author comments on rājyaśrī: arisenārjunena nirjitā | rājyaśrī (ms:
rākṣaśrī) buddhatvam nṛpatvañ ca (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 120, 128 [fol. 1b2]).
23 The reference is to the desire realm (kāmadhātu), the realm of [subtle] corporeality
(rūpadhātu) and the realm of incorporeality (ārūpyadhātu). Cf. YȘV 134, n. 88; 205,
n. 350.
tr
24
These first three verses are translated freely and somewhat imprecisely in Thurman
1991: 22 and Loizzo 2007: 41f. The metre for the third verse is upajāti; the first two
quarters are in indravajrā and the last two in upendravajrā.
25 Cf. BHSD s.v. uttāna: “(of doctrines ...) obvious, simple, easily comprehensible.”
See also PSP₁2, n. 3 and “Additions et Corrections" for PsP₁ 2, n. 3 (PsP₁ 595). PsP
Tib: sla ba.
26 Yonezawa (2004: 120, 128 [fol. 1b2]) reads the *LT here as: satī prakriyā
kleśakṣayo pāpam āngī (?) yasmin vākye tena grathitām. Perhaps one should read
kleśakṣayopāyamārgo instead of kleśakṣayo pāpam āṁgī.
27 Stcherbatsky (1927: 82) either misreads or interprets de La Vallée Poussin's anila
as anala and translates "fires." All three of de La Vallée Poussin's manuscripts read
anila, and all but four of the manuscripts used for the present study attest anila; the
four exceptions attest atila, the result of the frequently occurring confusion of n and t
in Nepalese manuscripts. PsP Tib presents rlung. Stcherbatsky's error leads him to
assume a connection between the compound tarkānila and the title of a work
attributed to Bhāviveka, namely, the Tarkajvālā, even though it is not the work of
Bhāviveka's which is critiqued in the first chapter of the PsP and is not, to my
knowledge, ever referred to by Candrakīrti in the PsP. He (ibid., 82, n. 1) writes,
"This is a jeer at Bhāvaviveka who is called a champion of logic (tārkika). It does not
mean that dialectical subtleties will be avoided, but that all arguments will be
indirect. The word tarkānila evidently alludes to Tarkajvāla (sic) the title of
Bhāvaviveka's work." Stcherbatsky translates tarkānilāvyākulitā as "unobscured by
the fires of dialectics," but avyākulita means "not agitated, undisturbed"; fire would
in any case tend to destroy rather than “obscure.” My translation “reasoning” for
tarka is not ideal, for the first chapter deals extensively with logical methods and
reasons, but it is difficult to find a suitable translation; it would seem that excessive,
unnecessary analysis and speculation, including unacceptable logical methods, are
intended (Candrakīrti will refer to Bhāviveka as a tārkika). A wind-water metaphor is
intended with the penultimate compound and the final word of the verse: water (=10
§2. In this regard, the treatise (śāstra) about to be explained is the one
which commences "Not from self, nor from other, nor from both"2⁹
[namely, Nāgārjuna's Madhyamakaśāstra].³⁰ With regard to the
question "What is its [i.e., this treatise's] connection (sambandha),
subject matter (abhidheya) and purpose (prayojana)?”,³¹ this, first, is
31
TRANSLATION
Candrakīrti's commentary) that is undisturbed by the wind (= reasoning) remains
calm and transparent/clear (prasanna).
28 This final verse is in indravajrā metre.
2⁹ MMK I.1: na svato nāpi parato na dvābhyām nāpy ahetutaḥ | utpannā jātu vidyante
bhāvāḥ kvacana kecana ||.
30 Candrakīrti refers to Nāgārjuna's main work as the Madhyamakaśāstra; see, e.g.,
PSPM $71 (PSP₁ 40.7), and MABhed 231.7 where he makes reference to the dbu ma'i
bstan bcos (*Madhyamakaśāstra). The Madhyamakaśāstrastuti—accepted by de Jong
as composed by Candrakīrti-which appears (only) in ms D after the final colophon
of the PSP (the last folio of ms P and ms Q is missing), refers to Nāgārjuna's work in
a similar way (verse 4: madhyamake śāstre); it also refers to the kārikās constituting
it (verse 10: śāstragaditās tāḥ kārikā[ḥ]) (see de Jong 1979: 543f.; 549).
31 The discussion of the sambandha, abhidheya and prayojana of the treatise
commented upon is a methodological feature of many commentaries, both Buddhist
and non-Buddhist (the three appear to be anticipated already in Patañjali's
Mahābhāṣya), and primarily serves to confirm the treatise's meaningfulness, which is
discerned with the aid of these three (or more) criteria. According to Edwin Gerow
(2008: ix-x), the (later) four traditional anubandhas include these three plus the
adhikārin, the qualified reader. Ms Q reads sambandhābhidheyaprayojanaprayojana
(unfortunately, the initial folio for ms P is missing) and PsP Tib also presents the
third and final member as dgos pa’i dgos pa (*prayojanaprayojana); nine of the PsP
paper manuscripts attest a similar compound consisting, however, of four members,
namely, sambandhābhidheyaprayojanatatprayojana. The "purpose of the purpose"
was, as de Jong (1978: 28) states, probably introduced only by later authors (in the
frequent cases where the prayojana was considered to be comprehension of the
subject matter, the benefit of this knowledge was indicated with the prayojana-
prayojana). Neither a prayojanaprayojana, in place of prayojana, nor a tatprayojana
as an additional fourth item is mentioned in either the Sanskrit or the Tibetan text of
the PSP in the explanation of the individual members of the compound that
immediately follows this listing, and both must have been added by later hands,
though prayojanaprayojana early enough for the scholars involved with the PsP Tib
translation to have found it in at least one of the two manuscripts they relied on. Ms
Q's attestation of the reading is presumably due to the appropriation by a scribe
earlier in Q's line of this and other readings from a manuscript in the y line
(according to the Stemma, ms è's scribe would have borrowed it from ms 8). I
presume that the paper manuscripts' reading also derives from ms 8, and that their tatPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
11
the connection (sambandha)³2 for the treatise: Having started with,33
according to the manner enjoined in the Madhyamakāvatāra, the
first generation of the resolve [to strive for awakening] (cittotpada)³5
34
35
represents an additional clarificatory interpolation (it is also possible that tat was
omitted from Q). Buddhapālita refers to and explains only the prayojana of the
MMK; Bhāviveka mentions and explains only the sambandha. On the abhidheya, the
prayojanaprayojana and other terms as used in tantric texts, see Broido 1983. For
further remarks on sambandha, abhidheya and prayojana, see below, Appendix I.
32 The connection (sambandha) as presented by many commentators is the
connection or relation existing between two of the other introductory terms, usually
that occurring between the subject matter (abhidheya) and discourse/text (abhidhāna)
or prakaraṇa/śāstra, or between the purpose and the subject matter, both often
described as in an upeya-upāya or sādhya-sādhana relationship. The sambandha
described here, however, appears to be similar to one of the types of connection dis-
cussed by Kumārila, namely, the category of sambandha expressed as the relation
between two actions, the former action ultimately being the cause of, or leading
directly to, the composing of a sūtra/śāstra. According to Candrakīrti, the "action" of
accomplishing the first cittotpada inspired Nāgārjuna, who was intent on rescuing
beings from samsāra, to undertake in service of this goal the "action" of composing
his work. For details, see below, Appendix I.
33 For examples involving the construction ādim kṛtvā, see BHSD, s.v. ādi. *LȚ's
author comments on the word yāvat as follows: yāvad ity uktām (ms: uktai) prajñā-
pāramitānītim jñātvā sāstram krtam ity arthah (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 120, 128 [fol.
1b3]).
34 Candrakīrti is referring to his description in chapter one of the MA (given its
reference here and elsewhere in the PSP presumably composed prior to the PsP) of
the first bhūmi, the “Joyful” (pramuditā), and of the resolve to attain full awakening,
i.e., Buddhahood, for the sake of other beings that informs this bhūmi. MA I.1 lists
the three factors held to be the cause of bodhisattvahood, namely, (a mind of)
compassion (kāruṇyacetas; snying rje'i sems), non-dual knowledge (advayadhī; gnyis
su med blo) and the intent/resolve to fully awaken (sambodhicitta; byang chub sems):
MA I.1: munīndrajāḥ śrāvakamadhyabuddhāḥ sambodhisattvaprabhavāś ca buddhāḥ
| kāruṇyaceto 'dvayadhīś ca hetuḥ sambodhicittam ca jinātmajānām ||; MA Tib: nyan
thos sangs rgyas 'bring rnams thub dbang skyes || sangs rgyas byang chub sems dpa'
las 'khrungs shing || snying rje’i sems dang gnyis su med blo dang || byang chub sems
ni rgyal sras rnams kyi rgyu || (cf. MHK I.6, which includes mahāmaitrī as a cause of
Buddhahood). For further details, see Appendix II and the following notes.
35 The technical term cittotpada, with its modifier prathama, may have been
employed instead of bodhicitta to distinguish it from the more general bodhicitta and
to specify that Nāgārjuna's generation of (sam)bodhicitta corresponds to that of the
first bodhisattva level. In the introduction to MA I.4cd-5ab a tenfold differentiation
of bodhicitta is announced and in 5ab the first is called the prathamam cetas; MA12
which is adorned with non-dual gnosis (advayajñāna)36 [and]
TRANSLATION
I.4cd-5ab: kṛpāsvatantram jagatām vimuktaye samantabhadrapraṇidhipraṇāmitam
yad asya ceto muditāpratiṣṭhitam jinātmajasya prathamam tad ucyate ; MA Tib:
rgyal ba’i sras po 'di yi sems gang 'gro ba rnams || rnam par grol bar bya phyir
snying rje’i dbang gyur cing || kun tu bzang po’i smon pas rab bsngos dga' ba la || rab
tu gnas pa de ni dang po zhes bya'o || "The mind of this son of the Conqueror that, for
the sake of liberating beings, is under the sway of compassion [and] dedicated [to full
awakening] by the vow of Samantabhadra, [and] that abides in joy, is called the first
[bhūmi]." He clarifies in his commentary that it is anāsravajñāna imbued with
karuṇā and bodhicitta which is distinguished into “parts" and attains the denotation
bhūmi. On the terms cittotpāda, bodhicitta and bodhicittotpāda and their historical
backgrounds, see Wangchuk 2007: 144ff.; on the indispensability of and benefits of
bodhicitta, see ibid., 154ff.
Candrakīrti quotes the Lankāvatārasūtra's prediction of Nāgārjuna's attainment of
the [first] bhūmi called Pramuditā in his commentary on MA VI.3; see MABhed
76.13-16. The bodhisattva who has attained the first bhūmi is, according to MA I.6
and commentary, free from the three fetters (samyojana) of 1) the (false) view that
the skandhas are the Self (satkāyadṛṣṭi), 2) doubt (vicikitsā) and 3) overestimation of
one's moral conduct and vows (śīlavrataparāmarśa), and is able to shake a hundred
worlds (lokadhātu). According to MA 1.5cd and commentary, it is only upon
accomplishment of the first cittotpāda, i.e., upon attaining the first bhūmi, that one
may be designated a bodhisattva; Candrakīrti justifies his assertion by citing the
Ardhatṛtīyasāhasrī, which states that only one who has realized the non-existence of
dharmas is deserving of the appellation "bodhisattva." Compare, e.g., the Bodhi-
sattvabhūmi in which it is stated that it is with the very first cittotpāda, i.e., right at
the moment of the ordinary person's initial resolve to attain awakening, that an
individual enters the Mahāyāna and can be called a bodhisattva: tasya ca cittasya
sahotpādād avatīrṇo bhavati bodhisattvo 'nuttare bodhimahāyāne | bodhisattva iti ca
samkhyām gacchati yad uta samketavyavahāranayena | tasmāt sa cittotpādaḥ ava-
tārasamgrhītaḥ | (cf. Wangchuk 2007: 368). On the attempt in Tibet to reconcile
these two opposing views, see ibid., 40, n. 83.
36 Candrakīrti explains the advayadhī (gnyis su med blo) of MA I.1 in the pertinent
section of the MABh as dngos po dang dngos po med pa la sogs pa mtha’ gnyis dang
bral ba'i shes rab “the insight free from the two extremes of existence and non-
existence, etc." (MABhed 6.11-13). He refers to it at the end of the section as gnyis su
med pa'i shes rab (MABhd 7.8) and quotes RĀ II.74 (cf. MABhed 7.10-13) in which
the quasi-synonym gnyis la mi brten ye shes appears. Cf. MMK XV.5 where Nāgār-
juna explains that worldly people speak of non-existence only in relation to some-
thing that has existed, i.e., something whose existence has "become otherwise,” but
when existence is logically impossible, then non-existence is totally impossible:
bhāvasya ced aprasiddhir abhāvo naiva sidhyati | bhāvasya hy anyathābhāvam abhā-
vam bruvate janāḥ ||; see also his rhetorical question at MMK V.6ab: avidyamāne
bhāve ca kasyābhāvo bhaviṣyati |. At MABhed 7.14-16ff., the root of non-dual gnosis
(*advayajñāna, gnyis su med pa’i ye shes) is said to be karuṇā; at MABhed 8.10-12 it13
37 [the
preceded by the means of great compassion (mahākaruṇā),³
resolve that acts] as a cause for the arising of the gnosis of the
Tathāgata, the Master Nāgārjuna, who had finally understood the
correct method (nīti)³8 of the perfection of insight (prajñāpāramitā),³
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
is asserted that the individual who has vowed to bring others to the state of
Buddhahood cannot do this without advayajñāna.
37 The karuṇā that arises in the bodhisattva owing to the bodhisattva's awareness of
the suffering that ordinary beings experience and that inspires the resolve to awaken,
is praised and discussed in MA I.2-4ab and in the commentary thereon. See the
previous three notes and Appendix II. On karuṇā as the root cause of bodhicitta, see
Wangchuk 2007: 285-289. karuṇā is divided into sattvālambanā, dharmālambanā
and anālambanā karuṇā (cf. MABh 1907: 258, n. 1); see Schmithausen 2000c: 446-
448; a Tibetan presentation is found in Hopkins 1980: 116-125. On karuṇā in early
Buddhism, see Maithrimurthi 1999, chapters 3 and 6; see also Schmithausen 2000b.
On the general tension in Mahāyāna between śūnyatā and karuṇā and attempts to
reconcile the two, see Schmithausen 2000c.
38 On prajñāpāramitānīti, see below Appendix III.
39 The word pāramitā is derived from parama which means "highest,” “most
excellent," "best" (see Hirakawa 1990: 299; BHS and PTSD entries for pārami, ᵒmī
and for pāramitā; see also Dayal 1978: 165f.). Candrakīrti, however, like
Avalokitavrata and a number of other Buddhist authors, understands pāramitā to be a
compound with the meaning "gone to the other side” (this is also the way it has been
understood by Kumārajīva, one of the early Chinese translators of Prajñāpāramitā
texts; see Hirakawa 1990: 299f.). In his commentary on MA I.16ab, Candrakīrti
substantiates this interpretation by referring to Pā 6.3.1 alug uttarapade “elision does
not take place before the following member of the compound" (slightly revised
translation of Vasu 1980: 1209), presenting pāramitā as an aluk tatpuruṣa compound
(thus pāramita instead of pāreta). He additionally refers to Pā 6.3.109 as an
alternative rule for the formation of pāramitā: pṛṣodarādīni yathopadiṣṭam “The
elision, augmentation and mutation of letters seen in prșodara, etc., though not found
in treatises of grammar, are, to the extent they are taught by the sages, valid"
(slightly revised translation of Vasu 1980: 1241; Böthlingk 2001: 347: “Mit pṛṣodara
u.s.w. verhält es sich, wie gelehrt wird"). Candrakīrti asserts: de la pha rol zhes bya
ba ni gang 'khor ba'i rgya mtsho'i phar 'gram dang ngogs te | nyon mongs pa dang
shes bya’i sgrib pa ma lus pa spangs pa’i rang bzhin mnga’ ba’i sangs rgyas nyid do ||
pha rol tu son pa ni pha rol tu phyin pa’o zhes bya ste | tshig phyi ma yod na mi
mngon par mi bya'o zhes bya ba'i mtshan nyid 'di (MABhun: 'dis) las kyi rnam par
dbye ba mi mngon par ma byas pas gzugs su 'gyur ba'am | pṛ șo da ra la sogs pa yin
pa’i phyir phyi ma’i mtha’ can nyid du bzhag go || (MABhed 30.11-17; see MABhr
1907: 277-279 and n. 2). De La Vallée Poussin translates the prșodara passage "ou
bien, appartenant au groupe du type pṛṣodara, il présente la fin du second [terme],"
but adds that his interpretation is conjectural, "pour ne pas dire hasardée." His14
TRANSLATION
out of compassion composed the treatise (śāstra), for the sake of the
understanding of others.
That which subdues (sas) all the enemy defilements and
completely (sam) protects (√trai) from bad rebirths (durgati),
[indeed] from becoming (bhava) [i.e., rebirth in general], is, in
virtue of [this] subduing and the quality of protecting, a treatise
(sastra). This pair, however, is not [to be found] in the doctrines
of others.
40
interpretation assumes that "le mot pāramitā ne presente que la finale du second
terme,” i.e., that pāramitā is a formation from pāra‹gā›mitā. If I understand de La
Vallée Poussin correctly, he is suggesting that Candrakīrti implies that the latter
constituent, i.e., mitā of the compound pāramitā, “possesses (only) the end” of the
word gāmitā inasmuch as its former part, i.e., gā, has been elided. This is an
interesting but probably overly complicated solution: the Sanskrit reads merely ...
pṛṣodarāditvād vā māntatvanipātanam “or, owing to [instances like] prṣodara and so
forth there is the irregularity that it (= pāra) has a final m.” MABh Tib's phyi ma'i
mtha' can would seem to mean that pāra “has an extreme final,” i.e., the added m.
One wonders if phyi is an interpolated error; removed, ma'i mtha' can would
translate māntatva, and Skt and Tib would unproblematically correspond.
40
This verse does not appear in PsP Tib, which appears to indicate that it was not in
either of the manuscripts relied on to produce the Tibetan translation. It thus may be
an accretion. I have retained it in the critical edition only because it occurs in all of
the extant Sanskrit manuscripts of the PsP. If it is an accretion, it may have entered
them via msß since ms 8 (descended from ms y) passed on its readings to PsP Tib
(see Manuscript Description: Stemma).
De La Vallée Poussin (cf. PsP₁ 3, n. 3), finding va as the third word of the first
quarter in his manuscripts, acknowledges that his conjectured reading_va[ḥ] “est
douteuse" and proposes vai or ca as the correct reading. De Jong (1978: 28) corrects
va[h] to ca on the basis of the verse as found at MAVȚ 3.9. The MAVȚ just previous
to the verse expands it in prose; pāda d is elaborated with: etac ca dvayam api
sarvasmin mahāyāne sarvasmimś ca tadvyākhyāne vidyate nānyatreti (3.6-8). MAVT
Tib for the verse reads: nyon mongs dgra rnams ma lus 'chos pa dang || ngan 'gro
srid las skyob pa gang yin pa || []chos skyob yon tan phyir na bstan bcos te || gnyis po
'di dag gzhan gyi lugs la med || (P 20b8-21a1). Two sentences containing references
to durgatito bhavāt appear in MAVȚ Tib antecedent to the verse (the MAVT
Sanskrit is damaged for the relevant part of the sentences): the first connects the
words ngan song rnams and srid pa with dang, i.e., understands them as a pair (for
Sanskrit reconstruction, cf. Yamaguchi 1934: 3 and Stanley 1988: 4, n. 12) but the
second, immediately before the verse and thus possibly intended as a gloss of the
verse, uses the words ngan 'gro’i srid pa, i.e., unexpectedly assumes a tatpuruṣa (cp.
Yamaguchi 1934: 3.6). Stcherbatsky (1992: 06, n. 48) notes that the etymology found
here in the PSP is the same as that presented in the Vyākhyāyukti (see D 123a2-4; PPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
15
§3. And the Master [Nāgārjuna] himself presents [in his mangala
verses] the subject matter (abhidheyārtha) along with the purpose
(prayojana) of the entire treatise that he is about to declare. Having
brought out [in these verses the Tathāgata's] greatness (māhātmya) as
someone who without error illuminates it (i.e., this subject matter),4¹
41
143a4-6). Gokhale (1937: 283, n. 1) remarks that Guṇaprabha, in the introduction to
his commentary on the Pañcaskandhaka, ascribes the verse to Āryadeva. The same
etymology is alluded to in the TJ on MHK II.7b (śāstralokajñatāpaṭuḥ): bstan bcos
'jig rten shes la mkhas (D: ||) zhes bya ba ni ngan song ba'i 'jigs pa las skyob pa dang
nyon mongs pa'i dgra 'dul nus pa'i bstan bcos shes pa la mkhas pa dang | (D 52a2; P
55a7-8; Heitmann 2004: 72); Bhāviveka refers to the etymology of √śās as presented
in the verse etymologizing śāstra in his explanation of the word śāsana in chapter 18
of the PP (see Eckel 1980: 231). The etymology for the word śāstra as set forth by
the verse is again found in Avalokitavrata’s ṭīkā on Bhāviveka's PP: nyon mongs pa’i
dgra rnams 'chos pa'i phyir dang | ngan song pa'i 'jigs pa las (P: la) skyob pa'i phyir
bstan bcos zhes (P: shes) bya'o || (PPȚ D 8b1; P 9b8); Avalokitavrata provides
alternative explanations of śāstra based on both √śās in its meaning "subdue" and tra
= tri “three,” and √śās in its meaning “teach” and tra = tri “three”: yang na bstan
bcos zhes bya ba ni rnam par rtog pa’i dgra 'chos pa'i phyir dang | bsam gyis mi
khyab cing rmad du byung ba'i sku gsum thob par byed pa'i phyir bstan bcos so ||
yang na bstan bcos zhes bya ba ni chos zhi ba nye bar ston pa'i phyir dang | lhag pa'i
tshul khrims dang | lhag pa'i sems dang | lhag pa'i shes rab kyi bslab pa gsum nye bar
ston pa'i phyir dang | de bzhin gshegs pa shā kya thub pas bstan pa rnam par thar pa
gsum ston pa'i phyir bstan bcos so || (PPȚ D 8b1-3; P 9b8-10a3). Another etymology
for sastra appears in SSV 225.14-23; Erb (1997: 55) translates the section: "... so
spricht man von Lehrwerk (*śāstra), weil es [als] nicht verkehrter Weg die
Befleckungen (kleśa) vernichtet (*śāsti). [Die Wurzel] śās ('jig pa) [bedeutet auch]
'vernichten' ('gog pa). Denn [auch] im gewöhnlichen Leben sagt man ja, wenn einer
hingerichtet wird, dass man ihn mit der ‘grossen Strafe' vernichtet (= bestraft).” Erb
notes that Candrakīrti presumably derives the meaning “correct way, method” from
tra, the suffix indicating the means for the accomplishment of the verbal action; he
suggests the reconstruction *śāsaty anena aviparītena mārgeṇa kleśān iti śāstram.
Candrakīrti, commenting at the beginning of the CST on the individual words of the
compound catuḥśatakaśāstra, states briefly: ... 'dzin pa rnam pa sna tshogs pa 'chos
pa'i phyir na de nyid bstan bcos (see CŚȚ D 32a7-32b1; P 34b6-7).
ed
41 De La Vallée Poussin has overlooked that his manuscripts present tadaviparīta-
samprakāśakatvena (L without ᵒsamᵒ) and presents the compound tadaviparīta-
samprakāśatvena; he does understand the compound to be referring to the Tathāgata
(see PSP₁ 3, n. 4). Stcherbatsky (1927: 84 and n. 1) understands the compound as
referring the śāstra, and paraphrases: “He tries to impress upon us that will be a
grand and fundamental treatise, because it will present this idea in a thorough and
unflinching manner."
L16
TRANSLATION
42
[Nāgārjuna,] desiring to pay homage to the Tathāgata, to the
supreme teacher (paramaguru) who exists undifferentiated from the
nature of that¹3 [subject matter]-[a homage] inspired by [his]
composition of the treatise-[thus] states [the two verses] which
commence
[He] who, [fully awakened, taught] dependent-arising [which is]
Without cessation, without arising, without annihilation, not
eternal,
Without one thing, without separate things, without coming,
without going. 45
44
4² For references to and etymologies of the word Tathāgata, see PsP₁ 31, n. 1; May
1959: 122, n. 317; YŚV 105, n. 10; Erb 1997: 110, n. 59. Candrakīrti writes in CŚT
to CŚ IX.1cd (CŚȚed 164.13-15): sa evānityaśūnyatopadeśena yathā bhāvānām sva-
bhāvas tathā gato buddhas tathāgata ity ucyate | and cites the (unidentified) etymol-
ogy (yathā coktam) atītā tathatā yadvat pratyutpannāpy anāgatā | sarvadharmās tathā
drstās tenoktaḥ sa tathāgataḥ || (CST 164.17-18), as well as the etymology found in
the Vajracchedikā Prajñāpāramitā: tathāgata iti subhūte ucyate na kvacid gato na
kutaścid āgataḥ | tenocyate tathāgato 'rhan samyaksambuddha iti (ed. E. Conze, Serie
Orientale XIII, Rome: Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente, 1957, P.
59.5-7; Tib at CŚȚed 167.1-5; CŚȚ Skt not preserved). See also Avalokitavrata's PPT
for a list of etymologies (D 19b2-21b1; P 23b3-25b5).
ed
43 *LȚ: tat(ms: tata)svabhāveti pratītyasamutpādasvabhāvaḥ (cf. Yonezawa 2004:
120, 128 [fol. 1b3]).
44 In PSP Tib, anekārtham and anānārtham are interpreted as karmadharaya
compounds, not as bahuvrīhis: tha dad don min don gcig min (“not different things,
not one thing"). See n. 102. Pa tshab has not translated the two verses but has rather
inserted Klu'i rgyal mtshan and Jñānagarbha's translation of them; cf. the Tibetan in,
e.g., ABhed 237f. and BPed 1.
45 MMK verses of homage I-IIa. The Sanskrit manuscripts at this point present only
the first verse and the first quarter of the second, thus do not include the terms that
indicate the prayojana, i.e., nirvāṇa. The Tibetan continues on with the second
quarter of the second verse, thereby adding prapañcopaśamam śivam (spros pa nyer
zhi zhi). The translators may have supplied the second quarter in order to provide for
explicit mention of the words indicating the purpose. The citation in the Sanskrit
possibly ends with the compound pratītyasamutpāda because it will be the main topic
in the paragraphs that follow.
Note that the order of anekārtham anānārtham and anāgamam anirgamam is re-
versed in PsP Tib so that the verse-half reads 'ong ba med pa 'gro med pa || tha dad
don min don gcig min ||. When the individual words of this verse-half are explained in
prose, PSP Tib follows the order in PsP Tib's verse.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Thus here, (i.e., according to these verses) dependent-arising
(pratītyasamutpāda) qualified by the eight qualifiers "without
cessation" (anirodha), etc., is the subject matter of the treatise.
nirvāṇa [of homage verse IIb], characterized as the calming of all
manifoldness (prapañcopaśama) and [ultimate] welfare (siva), is
indicated as the purpose of the treatise.
With this [quarter, i.e., homage verse IId],
To him, the best of expounders, I pay homage
17
46
the [actual] homage [is indicated].4
§4. Thus (iti) this, to start, is the meaning of the pair of verses as a
whole (samudāyārtha).
§5. [Now,] on the other hand, the meaning of the [individual]
elements (avayavārtha) (i.e., the words) is analyzed. Among them,
cessation (nirodha) [means] stopping (niruddhi); [that is,] momentary
destruction (kṣaṇabhanga) is called cessation.48 Arising (utpāda)
[means] originating (utpādana),“ [that is,] the coming forth of indi-
vidual existence (atmabhāvonmajjana). Annihilation (uccheda)
[means] termination (ucchitti); the meaning is: the cutting off of the
continuum (prabandhavicchitti). Eternal (śāśvata) [means] permanent
(nitya); the meaning is: abiding for all time (sarvakālasthāsnu). One
thing (ekārtha), [a karmadhāraya compound dissolved as] "this is one
and a thing as well," [is used in the sense of] a thing not different
46 PSP Tib adds the verb bstan (nirdiṣṭa), apparently to clarify the anuvṛtti of the
previous nominal predicate.
47 The explanation of the individual words of the introductory verses does not occur
in PsP Tib after its equivalent for tatra, and rather appears only after the discussion
of the compound pratītyasamutpāda (see Tibetan edition §15). For the reasons for
this and further comments, see below Appendix IV.
48 Cf. Candrakīrti's refutation of the Sautrāntika tenet of the uncaused perishing of
things at PSP₁ 173.8-12 (cp. AKBhed 193.7-8) in the context of the rejection of the
samskṛtalakṣaṇa nirodha where nirodha, vināśa, nāśa and kṣaṇabhanga are used as
quasi-synonyms.
49
PsP Tib skye ba for utpādana, which is normally attested in its causal sense.18
TRANSLATION
(abhinnārtha) [from another thing]; the meaning is: not distinct (na
pṛthak). Separate thing (nānārtha) [is used in the sense of a] thing dif-
ferent (bhinnārtha) [from another]; the meaning is: distinct (pṛthak).
Coming (agama) [means] coming toward/approaching (āgati), [that
is,] the coming to a proximate place of those situated in a distant
place. Going (nirgama) [means] going away/departing (nirgati), [that
is,] the going to a distant place of those situated in a proximate
place.50
§6. [The verbal root] i (eti)5¹ has the meaning "going” (gati), [the
prefix] prati has the meaning "attaining” (prāpti). Owing to the
50 Candrakīrti's explanation of the elements to be negated for pratītyasamutpāda of
the homage verses is merely a more elaborate version of Bhāviveka's, which reads:
'gag pa zhes bya ba ni 'jig pa’o || skye zhes bya ba ni 'byung ba'o || chad pa zhes bya
ba ni rgyun chad pa'o || rtag (P: rtags) pa zhes bya ba ni dus thams cad du gnas pa'o ||
'ong ba zhes bya ba ni tshur 'ong ba'o || 'gro zhes bya ba ni phar 'gro ba'o || tha dad
don (D without don) ces bya ba ni don tha dad pa'o || don gcig ches bya ba ni don tha
mi dad pa (PP D 47a4-5; P 55b5-6; see Kajiyama 1963: 44, Ames 1993: 217).
Avalokitavrata comments on Bhāviveka's gloss of nirodha: 'jig pa dang med pa dang
nyams pa gang yin pa de ni 'gag pa zhes bya'o (cp. PSP₁ 170.3: nirodho hi
nāmābhāvaḥ); on utpāda: 'byung ba dang srid pa dang 'phel pa gang yin pa de ni
skye zhes bya'o ||. To Bhāviveka’s gloss on śāśvata he adds that that which has a
nature that abides for all time is śāśvata; that is to say, that which does not change,
being characterized also later by its previous aspect, is śāśvata (gang la dus thams
cad du gnas pa'i ngang tshul yod pa ste | rnam pa gang gis (P: gi) sngon nye bar
mtshon par gyur pa'i rnam pa de nyid kyis phyis kyang nye bar mtshon par 'gyur
zhing mi 'gyur ba de ni rtag pa zhes bya'o ||). His comments on agama and nirgama
are, interestingly, the same as Candrakīrti’s (e.g., for āgama: yul thag ring po nas yul
thag nye bar tshur 'ong ba ni 'ong ba zhes ba'o ||). He explicates Bhāviveka's gloss
*bhinnārtha for nānārtha as: kha dog dang sgra skad dang rnam pa dang yon tan
dag gis don tha dad pa ste, providing as an example fire with regard to water (chu la
me lta bu de ni don tha dad pa zhes bya'o ||) and then explains *abhinnārtha in the
opposite way, giving the example “not like fire with regard to water" (chu la me lta
bu ma yin pa de ni don gcig ces bya'o ||). See PPT D 41b6-42a4; P 48a8-48b6.
51 Candrakīrti follows the grammatical tradition's convention of referring to √i with
the nominalized finite form eti. The different basic meanings of √i are classified in
Pāṇini's Dhātupāṭha as different roots by way of the meta-words in, in and ik: Dhātu-
pāṭha 2.36 glosses in with gatau, thus √i occurring in the meaning of "going"; 2.37
glosses in with (nityam adhipūrvaḥ) adhyayane, thus √i, always preceded by the
prefix adhi, occurs in the meaning of "studying"; 2.38 glosses ik with (nityam
adhipūrvaḥ) smaraṇe, thus √i, always preceded by the prefix adhi, occurs in thePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
19
transformation of the meaning of the [verbal] root through the
influence of the prefix-
The meaning of the [verbal] root is forcibly led elsewhere by the
prefix, 52
As the sweetness of the water of the Ganges by ocean water³³
meaning of "remembering." PsP Tib has iti for eti; see Verhagen 1985: 27, point (6),
where the Tibetan scholar Blo gros brtan pa (probably thirteenth/fourteenth_c.)
asserts that Tibetan grammarians mistakenly use iti instead of eti (see also ibid., 31).
PSP Tib presents the explanation of prati first.
52
I have followed de La Vallée Poussin's lead and removed from the body of the
verse the hi that in all the manuscripts but Q (Q is damaged) follows upasargeṇa
because it adds a metrically disturbing ninth syllable to the pathyā anuṣṭubh śloka.
The manuscripts' inclusion of hi may point to early scribal interference: an
introductory enclitic hi may have been added by a scribe who did not realize that he
was tampering with a verse; I am not aware of other instances of Candrakīrti citing a
verse in which he inserts an introductory enclitic hi. That the verse includes hi may
even point to the verse itself being an early intrusion. It is possible that the well-
known verse (with or without hi) was originally a marginal gloss explaining the
text's upasargavaśena dhātvarthavipariṇamāt that was later, yet before the Tibetan
translation of the PSP was undertaken, inserted into the text by a scribe. The PSP
translators may have recognized that the verse was unmetrical but translated it as a
metrically correct Tibetan verse. Even though the verse gives the impression that it is
an interpolation, and may not belong to the original text, there is not enough evidence
to justify dispensing with it.
53 Candrakīrti explains the change in the meaning of the root √i from "going" to
"attaining" as due to the effect of the prefix, substantiating (if the śloka is original)
the meaning he derives from the conjoining of prati and √i with this verse from the
grammatical tradition. There is disagreement within the grammatical tradition as to
the correct reading of the śloka, disagreement which to a large extent has its source in
the discussion of whether upasargas possess their own independent meanings or
whether they as “illuminators” (dyotaka) merely “throw light” on verbal roots. Cf.
Sikau ad Pā 8.4.18 and Appendix V.
A version of the śloka quoted here in the PSP appears at MAVȚ 3.19-20 subsequent
to the citation of the śloka etymologizing śāstra, previously quoted in the PsP.
Yamaguchi (1934: 3.19) emends to anyatra nipate but gives anyaḥ pratīyate as the
manuscript reading. The Tibetan for the same MAVȚ verse-half, on the other hand,
reads skad dbyings don gyi stobs ldan yang || nye bar bsgyur bas zil non 'gyur || (P
21a3-4); Bhattacharya and Tucci (1932: note 31) reconstruct balavan api dhātvartha
upasargeṇa bādhyate; the original Sanskrit may have been closer to the version they
would prefer, i.e., upasargeṇa dhātvartho balavān abhibhūyate. Dimitrov (2007: 9)
finds the verse at the end of his manuscript of the Prādivṛtti; there pāda d reads
sāmudreṇāmbhasā yathā instead of sāgareṇa yathāmbhasā.20
TRANSLATION
54
the word pratītya here, ending in the lyaps4 suffix, [that is, the
gerund suffix ya,] is used in the sense of "attaining” (prāpti), [i.e.]
"relying" (apekṣā). Because [the verbal root] paď³5 preceded by [the
prefixes] sam and ut has the meaning "emerging" (prādurbhāva), the
word samutpada has the sense of "emerging." And therefore, the
meaning of [the compound] pratītyasamutpāda is "the arising
(utpāda) of things in reliance on causes and conditions."56
PSP Tib translates: “The meaning of the verbal root is transformed by the strength of
the prefix, like the water of the Ganges, though sweet, by the ocean water." The
verse and Candrakīrti's subsequent etymology are translated in Verhagen 1985: 42,
n. 115.
54 Pā 7.1.37: samāse nañpūrve ktvo lyap “In the case of a compound other than one
in which the prior constituent is a term negation, the suffix ktvā is replaced by the
suffix lyap."
55 Tib: pā ta, obviously the transcription for pāda.
56 Candrakīrti's explanation of the compound pratītyasamutpāda is similar to the first
of two set forth in the AKBh: atha pratītyasamutpāda iti kaḥ padārthaḥ | pratiḥ
prāptyartha eti (read: etir) gatyarthaḥ | upasargavaśena dhātvarthapariṇāmāt
prāpyeti yo'rthaḥ so 'rthaḥ pratītyeti | padiḥ sattārthaḥ samutpūrvaḥ prādur-
bhāvārthaḥ (AKBhed 138.1-3; see AKBh, III.78, La Vallée Poussin 1913a: 48-49;
Verhagen 1985: 43, n. 115). Yaśomitra clarifies: pratiḥ prāptyartha iti. prāptidyotaka
ity arthaḥ. itir gatāv iti. dhātvarthaḥ. pariṇāmād iti. (Tib reflects Skt. Read, perhaps,
itir gatāv iti dhātvarthapariṇāmād iti [“Because the meaning of the root-viz., √i in
the sense of going is transformed"]): (with Śāstri:) anekārthā hi dhātavaḥ. pratiś
copasargaḥ prāptidyotaka ity ayam itir gatyartham ujjhitvā prāptyartham āpadyate.
padiḥ sattārtha iti. padiḥ (Śāstri pada; Tib: ba da) sattāyām iti. (AKVy 294.21-24;
Tib: P 327b1-3). According to the Pāṇinian dhātupāṭha and Candragomin's
dhātupāṭha, the verb pad is used in the meaning of going (pada gatau). The verb vid,
two verbs after pad in each list, is given as used in the meaning of existing (vida
sattāyām).
See Verhagen's comments (1985: 23-25) on the sGra sbyor bam po gnyis pa’s
analysis of the compound pratītyasamutpāda. See also Hopkins' translation (1983:
662-666) of the section on the etymology of pratītyasamutpāda in 'Jam dbyang
bzhad pa's Grub mtha’i rnam bshad. On Pāli compounds (like paṭiccasamuppāda)
with gerunds as the first member having originally developed from combinations of
gerund and verb-form, cf. Norman 1992: 157, n. 72.
This explanation of pratītya as a gerund is criticized in AKBh immediately following
the explanation of the compound pratītyasamutpāda. The opponent, identified by
Yaśomitra as a Vaiyākaraṇa, states that a gerund suffix is employed in regard to an
action which occurs prior to another action, and that these two actions are performed
by the same agent (Pā 3.4.21: samānakartṛkayoḥ pūrvakāle; on this rule and thePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
21
discussion surrounding it see Tikkanen 1987: 37-39); for example, it is added to the
verb "bathed" in the sentence “having bathed, he eats"; however, in the case of
pratītyasamutpāda, the grammarian argues, there is nothing existing before the act of
arising that, having previously depended, afterwards arises, and it is impossible that
an action can exist without an agent (ekasya hi kartur dvayoḥ kriyayoḥ pūrvakālāyām
kriyāyāṇ ktvāvidhir bhavati | tadyathā snātvā bhunkta iti | na cāsau pūrvam utpādāt
kaścid asti yaḥ pūrvam pratītyottarakālam utpadyate | na cāpy akartṛkāsti kriyeti
[AKBhed 138.4-7]). Vasubandhu states that the criticisms do not apply, and asserts
the Sautrāntika view regarding the state of the arising dharma, namely, that it arises
as something "whose face is turned toward arising” (utpādābhimukha; Yaśomitra
glosses with utpitsuḥ), that is, as something future (anāgata), i.e., as something ready
to arise, on the verge of arising, and that it depends in this same state: ato yadavastha
utpadyate tadavastha eva pratyeti | kimavasthaś cotpadyate | utpādābhimukho
'nāgataḥ tadavastha eva pratyayam pratyetīty ucyate (AKBhed 138.13-15). He
rejects the grammarian's claim that the correct use of the gerund suffix demands that
one action must of necessity temporally precede another, citing examples where the
gerund is used in cases of simultaneous actions: sahakāle 'pi ca ktvāsti dīpam prāpya
tamo gatam āsyam vyādāya śete ca paścăc cet kim na samvrte || (see Pāsādika 1989:
60); the second is similar to the example given in Kāś to Pā 3.4.21 (āsyam vyādāya
svapiti "he sleeps with his mouth open"); on similar exceptions to the rule, see
Tikkanen 1987: 39 (on temporal neutralization of the past gerund 119-127).
Zakharyin (2000: 257) writes, "Thus, for Pāṇini's times, at least, NamUL=
formations might be used for expressing the meaning of not only the 'priority,' but of
the ‘simultaneousness' of the background action as well. Only much later, at the
epoch of classical Sanskrit, some (partial only!) kind of complementary distribution
on the plane of contence (= contents? -A.M.) got established between Ktvā= and
NamUL=, and still later NamUL= came out of use, having passed on its functions
(and, namely, the ability to express 'simultaneousness') to Ktvā=.” More recently,
Mattia Salvini has provided valuable references for pratītya of pratītyasamutpāda
understood as a gerund, introducing a pertinent comment on ktvā made by the
Buddhist grammarian Candragomin in his Cāndravyākaraṇa. Salvini (2011: 233)
notes that Candragomin does not provide the usual explanation of ktvā extended to
temporal simultaneity but does extend its meaning to "cases of dependence upon
something else (parāpekṣā).”
Vasubandhu also criticizes the grammarian's determination of agent and action,
asserting, "and in this case we do not see an action ‘becoming' (bhūti) which is
something different from the thing that is the agent of becoming. Therefore, there is
no blame in such linguistic usage”; na cātra bhavitur arthād bhūtim anyām kriyām
paśyāmaḥ | tasmād acchalam vyavahāreṣu (AKBhed 138.16-17). See AKBh III.78-
80; Stalker 1987: 188-191. This discussion in the AKBh is commented on in
Zakharyin's article on the functions of the Sanskrit gerund (cf. Zakharyin 2000).
Candrakīrti, perhaps because he considers pratītya explained in the meaning prāpti to
be sufficient clarification, does not deal with the grammarian's complaint, but in the
PP Bhāviveka presents and addresses the critique regarding the lack of something22
§7. However, others say that iti³7 [i.e., the action referred to by the
root √i, means] going (gati), [that is,] departing (gamana), [that is,]
perishing (vināśa). [The noun] ityāḥ³8 [thus] means “things that are fit
for going [i.e., perishing]."5⁹ prati is [used] in the meaning of
distribution (vīpsārtha).60 Having thus etymologically explained the
word itya as ending in a secondary suffix (taddhita) [i.e., in the suffix
ya, not in the primary suffix lyap] they describe [the compound]
pratītyasamutpāda as [meaning] the respective (prati prati) arising
(samutpäda) of things that are fit for going, that is, characterized by
TRANSLATION
existing prior to arising that could depend and the lack of an agent: 'dir kha cig na re
| gal te 'byung ba’i snga rol du 'bras bu rkyen dang phrad nas phyis 'byung na ni de’i
rten cing 'brel par ’byung ba zhes bya bar 'gyur ba zhig na | ’byung ba’i snga rol du
'bras bu rkyen dang mi 'phrad (P: phrad) de med pa'i phyir ro || de lta bas na rten
cing 'brel par 'byung ba’i sgra mi 'grub po || gal te rten cing 'brel par zhes bya ba
dang | 'byung zhes bya ba gnyis dus gcig tu khas len bas nyes pa med do (P: ||) zhe (P:
ce) na yang rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba'i sgra la bya ba gnyis dus gcig na med de |
par zhes brjod ba’i phyir dper na khru byas te bza’ zhes bya ba bzhin no || byed pa po
med par yang gzhi med pa’i bya ba mi rung ste | med pa'i phyir mo gsham gyi bu 'gro
ba bzhin no | zhes zer ro || (D 46b4-7; P 55a2-6; translated in Kajiyama 1963: 42-43;
Ames 1993: 215). Avalokitavrata identifies the criticism as that of opponents who
base themselves on considerations of the grammarians: kha cig na re zhes bya ba ni
de dag nyid 'dir skabs med bzhin du brda sprod pa’i tham lag gi rjes su zhugs nas
dgras rgol bar byed pa kha cig na re’o ||. Ames (1993: 237, n. 40) notes, “According
to Avalokitavrata, the Buddhist may try to avoid the difficulty presented by the first
syllogism by admitting that the result pre-exists potentially (nus pa'i tshul gyis). The
grammarian then puts forward the second syllogism.” Bhāviveka, like Vasubandhu in
the AKBh, argues that the gerund may be applied when two actions are simultaneous,
and presents kha gdangs te nyal (āsyam vyādāya śete/svapiti) and lam khyab par byas
te 'gro ("it moves along filling the roadway") as examples (see D 46b7-47a2; P 55a6-
55b1). See PPT for further comments on Bhāviveka's refutation of the criticism that
an agent of action is required (D 33b6-34a7; P 39b5-40a8).
57
Verhagen (1985: 45, n. 130) considers the appearance of iti here to be an error for
eti, which is also possible, and would have to be ascribed to scribal error.
58
ityāḥ appears in the masculine gender and in the plural for reasons of coherence,
i.e., because it is intended to refer to things (bhāva; dharma).
5⁹ Pā 4.4.98: tatra sādhuḥ "good in respect to this.” Kāś: tatreti saptamīsamarthāt
sādhur ity etasminn arthe yatpratyayo bhavati sādhur iha pravīņo yogyo vā
grhyate, nopakārakaḥ.
60
› PsP Tib begins the alternative explanation of pratītyasamutpāda with the sentence
explaining prati: gzhan dag ni pra ti ni zlos pa’i don to ||.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
23
perishing.6¹ For them, in the case [of statements] like "O monks, I am
about to teach you pratītyasamutpāda,"2 [or] "Who sees pratītya-
samutpāda sees the Dharma,"63 [this] etymology would be fine
61 At AKBhed 138.24-27 a second explanation of the compound pratītyasamutpāda is
set forth which avoids the grammarian's criticism in that it does not assume that the
compound contains a gerund. It is somewhat more explicit than Candrakīrti's
presentation: anye punar asya codyasya parihārārtham anyathā parikalpayanti |
pratir vīpsārthaḥ | itau sādhava ityā anavasthāyinaḥ | utpūrvaḥ padiḥ prādur-
bhāvārthaḥ tām tām kāraṇasāmagrīm pratītyānām samavāyenotpadaḥ pratītya-
samutpāda iti (AKBhå 138.24-27; see AKBh III.80, La Vallée Poussin 1913a: 49;
Stalker 1987: 192). Yaśomitra identifies the proponent of this explanation of the
compound as Śrīlāta. He specifies that the prefix sam is used in the meaning of
conjunction (samavāya) and, as stated in the AKBh, that it is (only) the root pad
preceded by the prefix ut that means emerging (prādurbhāva). Thus, the word
pratītyasamutpāda means the arising, in conjunction, of things fit for going, that is,
of things fit for perishing, with respect to this and that causal complex (tām tām
sāmagrīm pratīti. prater vīpsārthatām darśayati. ityānām vinaśvarāṇām samavā-
yenotpadaḥ pratītyasamutpādaḥ. Further elucidating the meaning of the prefix sam,
he adds: na kaścid dharma eka utpadyate sahotpādaniyamāt. rūpādīnām “kāme 'ṣṭa-
dravyako 'sabdaḥ paramāṇuḥ" (AK II.23ab) yāvac "citta-caittāḥ sahāvaśyam" (AK
II.24a) iti niyamāt (see AKVy 296.22-33; quoted in PsP₁5, n. 10).
Cp. with these two etymologies presented by Candrakīrti the two very different ones
set forth in VM, the second of which is metaphorically applied to the conditions
(dvedhā tato pavatte dhammasamūhe yato idam vacanam, tappaccayo tato yam
phalopacārena iti vutto); see VM 520f., VM 606f.
See also the comments by Schmithausen on the misinformed rendering of
pratītyasamutpāda as “interdependence” and the often misleading but “ubiquitous
rendering of samutpāda as ‘co-origination" (in a meaning different than Śrīlāta’s) in
secondary literature in Schmithausen 1997: 12-14, 52-59 and n. 65, 67, 73 and 76,
and 2000a: 63-65 (see also 2000d: 44, n. 12).
62 Cf. SN II.1.5-6: paṭiccasamuppādam vo bhikkhave desissāmi; SN II.2.13-14:
paṭiccasamuppādam vo bhikkhave desissāmi vibhajissāmi; SN II.25.11-12: pațicca-
samuppādañca vo bhikkhave desissāmi paṭiccasamuppanne ca dhamme = AKBhed
136.2: pratītyasamutpādam vo bhikṣavo deśayiṣyāmi pratītyasamutpannāmś ca
dharmān; AKVy 298.26-27: pratītyasamutpādam vo bhikṣavo deśayiṣyāmi. See
Pāsādika 1989: 58. The paṭiccasamuppāda taught at these references in the SN is that
characterized by twelve links. On the varying chains of conditions to be discerned in
the Canon, see Schmithausen 2000d.
63 Candrakīrti refers here to a sentence from the Śālistambasūtra: yo bhikṣavaḥ
pratītyasamutpādam paśyati sa dharmam paśyati, yo dharmam paśyati sa buddham
paśyati (Skt attested in AKVy 293.20-22; see Schoening 1995: 701). This version of
the citation appears at PsP₁ 160.5-7 (the vocative bhikṣavaḥ is not attested there
either), shorter ones at VVed 74.12-14 (uktam hi bhagavatā yo hi bhikṣavaḥ pratītya-24
TRANSLATION
because the meaning of distribution is possible and because there is a
compound [in which the case-ending of the noun pratītya would be
elided].64 But when a specific object is directly referred to in a case
like this [viz., the statement] “Depending on the visual faculty65 and
ed
tr
samutpādam paśyati sa dharmam paśyati) and YȘVed 48.6-9 (mdo sde las kyang sus
rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba mthong ba des chos mthong ngo ||). A citation similar to
the one in the Bodhisattvapiṭakasūtra which attests de bzhin gshegs pa instead of
sangs rgyas (see Schoening 1995: 4, n. 3) is quoted at ŚSV 245.4-7 by an opponent
who argues that if the Mādhyamika holds that causes (rgyu) do not really exist, then
he ruins dependent-arising: de la gnod pa yang rung ba ma yin te de mthong bas
chos mthong bar bcom ldan 'das kyis gsungs te | gang rten cing brel par ’byung ba
mthong ba des chos mthong la | gang gis chos mthong ba des de bzhin gshegs pa
mthong ngo zhes mdo las gsungs pa'i phyir ro ||. The quotation is translated by Erb
(cf. ŚSV 83) as "Wer das Entstehen in Abhängigkeit sieht, der sieht die [wahre]
Gesetzmäßigkeit [aller Daseinsfaktoren], und wer die [wahre] Gesetzmäßigkeit [aller
Daseinsfaktoren] sieht, der sieht den Tathāgata.” The Śālistamba passage is based on
Canonical statements: MN I.190.37-191.2: yo paticcasamuppādam passati so
dhammam passati, yo dhammam passati so paṭiccasamupādam passati; SN
III.120.28-29: yo kho Vakkali dhammam passati so mam passati; yo mam passati so
dhammam passati; Iti 91: Dhammam hi so bhikkhave bhikkhu passati, dhammam
passanto mam passatīti. See Scherrer-Schaub 1991: 173, n. 231; La Vallée Poussin
1913a: 70, n. 2; PsP₁ 596 ad PsP₁ 6, n. 2 for further references. The PsP attests
extended quotations from the sūtra at PsP₁ 560.3-570.2 and 593.3-594.6; for Sanskrit
quotations of the sūtra in other texts, see Schoening 1995: Appendix 1.
64
In both of the scriptural statements cited, the word pratītya taken as a noun satisfies
the requirement that it possess the distributive meaning indicated by the element
prati because arising can in each case be understood as applying to a multiplicity of
things characterized by perishing. Further, although according to the etymology
under discussion the compound pratītyasamutpāda would be dissolved as pra-
tītyānāṁ samutpādaḥ, the noun pratītya as a member of the compound would not
require a case ending. The first statement, according to this second etymology, could
be rephrased, "O monks, I am about to teach you the respective arising of things that
are fit for going, that is, of things characterized by perishing."
65 Although the fleshy eye-ball (māṇsapiṇḍa) is made of primary matter (bhūta), the
visual faculty (cakṣurindriya), like the other sense faculties, is made of subtle second-
ary matter (bhautika, rūpaprasāda; cf. AK 1.9cd: tadvijñānāśrayā rūpaprasādāś
cakṣurādayaḥ and AKBhed 6.2-3 (AKBhå; 7.23-26): yathoktam bhagavatā cakṣur
bhikṣo ādhyātmikam āyatanam catvāri mahābhūtāny upādāya rūpaprasāda iti
vistaraḥ; see also AK I.35ab and commentary). According to one opinion (AKBhed
33.17-19; AKBhã¡ 53.2-4), the atoms of the visual faculty are said to be arranged on
the pupil in the form of a cumin flower, and are covered with a translucent mem-
brane which keeps them in place; according to another, they are arranged on top of
one another, as in a ball, but do not obscure each other because they are transparent,PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
25
visibles,66 visual consciousness arises,"67 considering that it is
maintained that the arising of a single visual consciousness is, for its
part, caused by a single visual faculty, how could there be the
meaning of distribution in the word pratītya of [the phrase] cakṣuḥ
pratītya826⁹ The meaning “attaining” (prāpti), however, is possible in
like crystal. See, among others, May 1959: 91, n. 198, 199; PsP₁ 126, n. 1; Tillemans
1990: 251, n. 236; 255, n. 264; Stcherbatsky 1979: 12-13. Further references in
Preisendanz 1994: 444, n. 151.
66 PSP Tib attests gzugs (rūpam) for rūpāṇi. Candrakīrti focusses his argumentation
on one individual visual consciousness and one individual visual faculty. The trans-
lators may have found the fact that visual form appeared in the plural in the Sanskrit
to be distracting to the argumentation, since the idea of distribution could possibly be
argued to exist in regard to rūpāṇi, and so restricted the number of visual forms as
well. Alternatively, they may have appropriated the sentence from a pre-existing
translation that contained the singular form.
67 This often cited statement appears numerous times in the Canon: SN II.72.17-18,
etc.: cakkhum ca paṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhuviññāṇam; MN I.111.35-36:
cakkhuñ c'āvuso paṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhuviññāṇam. The statement appears at
PSP₁ 250.4-5 as it does here; PsP₁ 567.7-8: cakṣuḥ pratītya rūpaṁ cālokaṁ cākāśam
[ca] tajjamanasikāram ca pratītyotpadyate cakṣurvijñānam.
68 Candrakīrti is problematizing the fact that a single cakṣurvijñāna relies on a single
cakṣurindriya; multiplicity is precluded in such a case. PsP Tib reads mig dang gzugs
la brten nas (= cakṣuḥ pratītya rūpam ca) for cakṣuḥ pratītya, which is unnecessary
and distracting, in fact misleading. dang gzugs may have been added by the
translators because it appears before brten nas in the Tibetan translation of the cited
sentence, and not after it as in the Sanskrit.
69 Candrakīrti calls into question the credibility of the second etymology, using the
argument already set forth in the AKBh. Immediately following the second
explanation of pratītyasamutpāda, Vasubandhu states that this etymology is suitable
only in certain cases, and then works the Canonical statement regarding the arising of
visual consciousness into a rhetorical question: eṣā tu kalpanātraiva kalpyate (read:
kalpate: AKVy: yujyate; AKBh Tib: rtog pa 'di ni 'di kho na la rab tu brtag tu rung).
iha katham bhavisyati cakṣuḥ pratītya rūpāṇi cotpadyate cakṣurvijñānam iti (AKBhed
138.27-28). Yaśomitra explains the critique by demonstrating that in the case of this
specific Canonical statement neither the idea of distribution nor a compound—at
least a sensible one is possible: should one attempt to rescue pratītya as a noun by
placing it in a compound with cakṣus (of necessity cakṣūmṣi to take into account the
multiplicity, demanded by prati, of the perishing things), thus “hiding” its lack of a
case ending, the resulting compound “the visual faculties of the respective things
which perish" (pratītyacakṣūmṣi) will not be acceptable due to its meaninglessness in
the present context: pratir vīpsārtha ity evamādikā kalpanā 'traiva Pratītya-
samutpādasūtre yujyate. iha katham bhavisyati cakṣuḥ pratītya rūpāṇi cotpadyate26
TRANSLATION
regard to the word pratītya [understood as a gerund] not only when a
specific object is not referred to, namely, “arising in dependence"
(pratītya samutpāda), that is, “coming into existence upon attaining,"
(prāpya sambhava), but also when a specific object is referred to,
owing to the explanation “depending on the visual faculty," [i.e.,]
"attaining the visual faculty," [that is,] "relying on the visual faculty."
But in the case of the word itya as a secondary formation, given that
[one would expect to hear] a case-ending here in [the statement]
cakṣuḥ pratītya rūpāṇi cotpadyate cakṣurvijñānam due to the fact that
1) the word pratītya would not be an indeclinable and 2) it is not [part
of] a compound, there should be the reading cakṣuḥ pratītyam
vijñānam rūpāṇi ca (“consciousness fit for perishing on account of
the visual faculty and visibles [...]"). But this is not so [that is, one
does not encounter the word pratītya in this statement in a declined
form]. Therefore, the etymological explanation of it being in fact an
indeclinable ending in lyap should be accepted.
70
§8. [We] have, however, to start, the impression that there is sheer
ineptitude (akausala) in the reiteration of others' positions [regarding
cakṣurvijñānam iti. na hi pratītyānām cakṣūmṣi pratītyacakṣūmṣīti samāsaḥ
sambhavaty arthāyogāt. cakṣur hi pratītya rūpāṇi prāpya cotpadyate cakṣurvijñānam
ity ayam artho gamyate (AKVy 296.33-297.4). See also Hopkins 1983: 667f.
Bhāviveka views this same Canonical statement as ground for rejecting both
etymologies of the compound pratītyasamutpāda (Candrakīrti will claim he presents
both incorrectly; see PSPM §8): de yang mi rung ste | mig dang gzugs rnams la brten
nas mig gi rnam par shes pa 'byung ngo zhes gsungs pa 'di la don gnyi ga med pa'i
phyir ro || (PP D 46b3-4; P 54b8-55a1). Avalokitavrata clarifies that don gnyi ga
refers to the two etymologies and explains why neither is suitable as regards this
Canonical statement concerned with the arising of visual consciousness; see PPT D
29a7-29b6; P 34b5-35a6.
70
Given that the word pratītya is not explained as a gerund in the second etymology,
and since it stands alone in this third cited statement-not as a member of a com-
pound as in the first two Canonical statements (where it does not require declination
and is able to retain both its grammatical status as a secondary formation and its
meaning "things fit for perishing") it will need to be declined. It will be possible for
itya of pratītyam to be interpreted according to the second etymology, but since a
distributive meaning for prati is precluded due to the explicit determination of visual
consciousness as the specific referent (vijñānam has been moved forward in the
sentence because it is now modified by pratītyam), prati will have to be understood
in its sense of "on account of."PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
27
the etymology of pratītyasamutpāda] on the part of [Bhāviveka,] who
expresses criticism after repeating others' interpretations [as follows]:
Some claim that because the prefix prati is [used] in the meaning
of distribution (vīpsā), because [the verbal root] i has the
meaning "attaining" (prāpti), and because the word samutpāda
has the meaning "coming into existence" (sambhava), "arising in
dependence on these and those conditions," [that is,] "coming
into existence upon attaining [these and those conditions]" [is the
meaning of pratītyasamutpāda]. [But] others assert that
pratītyasamutpāda [means] "the respective arising of things
characterized by perishing (vināśin)."71
71 As can be observed time and again in the Tibetan translation of the first chapter of
the PsP, such quotations have been appropriated by the translators from existing
Tibetan translations of the texts cited. In the present case, Bhāviveka's restatement of
the two etymologies has been copied directly from Klu'i rgyal mtshan and
Jñānagarbha's Tibetan translation of the PP. Some of the citations inserted into the
Tibetan text of the PsP were slightly modified for the sake of updating terminology,
improving the expression or in order to bring the citations into line with the wording
of the respective Sanskrit citation in the PsP. I hypothesize that much of the insertion
work was done in Kashmir and that Pa tshab had access there to an assemblage of
proto-Kanjur and proto-Tanjur translated works, which may have been kept in a
section of the Ratnagupta monastery library in Śrīnagar. For more information, see
MacDonald 2015.
Pa tshab has until the direct quotation of Bhāviveka's words taken care to
transliterate the members of the compound pratītyasamutpāda, but when he copies in
(or has an apprentice copy in) the pre-translated passage from PP Tib, he introduces
Klu'i rgyal mtshan and Jñānagarbha's style of presenting the individual members of
the compound. The relevant section of the PP reads: rten cing 'brel par 'byung zhes
bya ba la | kha cig na re rten cing zhes bya ba’i tshig gi phrad¹ ni zlos pa’i don yin
pa'i phyir dang | 'brel par² zhes bya ba ni phrad pa'i don yin pa'i phyir dang | 'byung
ba zhes bya ba'i sgra ni skye ba’i don yin pa'i phyir rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba ste³
de dang de la rten cing phrad nas 'byung ba’o zhe’oª | gzhan dag na re so so³ ’jig pa
dang ldan pa rnams kyi 'byung ba ni rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba'o zhe'o | gzhan ma
yin pa ni de yang mi rung ste (D 46b2-3; P 54b6-8). PsP Tib: 'nye bar bsgyur ba for
tshig gi phrad; ²pa for par; ³omits rten cing 'brel par ’byung ba ste; ªrkyen de dang de
la brten nas 'byung ba ste phrad nas 'byung ba'o zhe'o for de dang de la rten cing
phrad nas 'byung ba'o zhe'o; ³so so so sor for so so. Translated in Kajiyama 1963:
42; Ames 1993: 215; Hopkins 1983: 669. Avalokitavrata identifies the persons
asserting the first etymology as "certain proponents of Madhyamaka tenets” (dbu ma
pa'i grub pa'i mtha' smra ba kha cig na re [PPT D 28b5; P 34a2]) and those
asserting the second as “other proponents of Madhyamaka tenets” (dbu ma pa’i grub28
TRANSLATION
Why? Because this [first party] who explains the word pratītya as
meaning "attaining" does not explain prati as denoting distribution,
nor [does he explain the verbal root] i as having the meaning
"attaining." Rather, he describes prati as having the meaning
"attaining,” and [the verbal root] i as meaning "going," and the
compounded (i.e., complete) word pratītya as [meaning] simply
"attaining."72 Now then, if reference to all possible things is intended
by the word pratītyasamutpāda etymologically explained in this way
[i.e., according to the correct version of this first etymology],73
pa’i mtha’ smra ba gzhan dag na re [PPȚ D 29a3; P 34a8]). He glosses Bhāviveka's
reference to the second etymology (so sor ’jig pa dang ldan pa rnams kyi 'byung ba)
with rgyu dang rkyen so sor nges pa skad cig so so re re la 'jig pa dang ldan pa'i
'bras bu rnams kyi tshogs shing 'byung ba (PPT D 29a4; P 34b1). The anonymous
author of the *LȚ identifies the person asserting the first etymology as Buddhapālita;
Hopkins (1983: 668ff.), presumably in reliance on the dGe lugs pa tradition, also
assumes that the specific proponent of the first is Buddhapālita. I am not aware of
any passage in BP in which pratītyasamutpāda is etymologized. *LT's author
identifies the person asserting the second as "a certain commentator" (kaścit
ṭīkākāraḥ); cf. Yonezawa 2004: 121, 129 [fol. 1b3]. On the Tibetan translation of the
word pratītyasamutpāda (prati = rten cing; itya = 'brel par; samutpāda = 'byung ba)
see Hopkins 1983: 884, n. 703.
72 To recapitulate:
First etymology (maintained by Candrakīrti, rejected-in its improperly restated
form by Bhāviveka): prati attaining; √i
going; thus pratītya attaining,
relying; samutpāda = emerging; thus pratītyasamutpāda = the arising of things in
reliance on causes and conditions.
=
=
=
=
Second etymology (rejected by Candrakīrti, rejected by Bhāviveka): prati
distribution; √i = going; itya fit for going, i.e., characterized by perishing;
samutpāda (although not specifically explained) = emerging; pratītyasamutpāda
the respective arising of things that are fit for going, that is, of things characterized
by perishing.
Bhāviveka's presentation of the first etymology: prati = distribution; √ i = attaining;
samutpāda = coming into existence; pratītyasamutpāda the coming into existence
[of things] in dependence on these and those (= various) conditions.
=
=
=
73 Candrakīrti refers to the etymology according to which the coalescence of the
prefix prati in the meaning of attaining with the verbal root √i results in the root
taking on the meaning of attaining, i.e., the version he accepts and that Bhāviveka has
attempted to repeat but presented in an erroneous way. This is also the version that
can be applied to statements dealing with the arising of an individual consciousness
from a single entity (such as the non-plural visual faculty). He acknowledges that if
the word pratītyasamutpāda is intended in a general way, then due to the multiplicityPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
29
namely, “arising in dependence" [means] "coming into existence
attaining,” a relation with distribution is effected [by the resulting
implication,] viz., “arising in dependence" [means] "coming into
existence attaining this and that complex of causes and conditions
(hetupratyayasamagrī)." But if there is reference to something
specific, then there is not a relation with distribution, as [evident] in
[formulations of Canonical statements such as] "attaining the visual
faculty and visibles." Thus, to begin, the Ācārya's reiteration is inept.
74
§9. The criticism stated [by Bhāviveka as regards the two
etymologies, viz.],
But this is not correct,75 because an association with either of the
meanings is not possible in respect to this [Canonical
76
of things referred to distribution (which Bhāviveka presents as referred to by prati
according to the first etymology) would indeed be implied, but he points out that the
distribution associated with such general applications cannot be referred to by the
prefix prati because distribution is not involved in cases of the arising of a specific
thing. Thus Bhāviveka's restatement of the first etymology, even if one makes
allowance for his lack of precision, cannot be accepted. Candrakīrti does not address
the possibility that Bhāviveka may have rejected this etymology because of his
erroneous presentation of it, that is, because according to his restatement of the
etymology, a relation with distribution cannot be made when specific instances of
arising are brought into the picture, such as in the example he brings forth and
Candrakīrti borrows, namely, the arising of visual consciousness in dependence on
the visual faculty and visibles.
74
PSP Tib reads brten nas (pratītya) instead of prāpya, which must have been attested
in one of the Sanskrit manuscripts available to the translators or was considered to be
preferable given that the discussion centres on the meaning of pratītya, especially
with respect to its meaning in specific Canonical statements.
75 De La Vallée Poussin presents the Sanskrit text of Bhāviveka's critique of the two
etymologies for pratītyasamutpāda as commencing with etad vā [a]yuktam kim ca
ayuktam etat, and punctuates it with a half-daṇḍa after [a]yuktam. The correct
reading, attested only by ms Q (ms P has a lacuna), is simply etac cāyuktam. All of
the paper manuscripts attest variants of etad vāyuktam | kim ca ayuktam etat for etac
cāyuktam (the akṣara dvā in etad vãº of ms J closely resembles the akṣara ccā). The
*LT cites exactly the PsP text passage under discussion, revealing that its author
relied on a manuscript that read as ms Q does: anūdya bhāviveko dūṣaṇam āha etac
cāyuktam iti (see Yonezawa 2004: 121, 129 [fol. 1b4]). PsP Tib’s de yang mi rung ste
has been copied in from PP Tib. For details, see below Appendix VI.30
TRANSLATION
statement], "Depending on the visual faculty and visibles, visual
consciousness arises"
9977
is also not appropriate. For what reason? [It is inappropriate] because
in not employing a [logical] argument (yukti) [to answer the question]
"Why is it not possible?"78 [his critique is just] a mere thesis
(pratijñāmātra).
79
76
I have emended the text for the compound atrārthadvayāsambhavāt of PsP₁ to
atrobhayārthābhisambandhāsambhavāt on the basis of ms P (ms Q reads atrobhaya-
thābhisambandhāsambhavād). PsP Tib attests 'di la don gnyi ga med pa’i phyir ro.
The lack of an equivalent for abhisambandha in PsP Tib could point to it having been
absent in at least one of the manuscripts used by the translators; its presumed absence
might be explained as the result of an early eyeskip from rthā to dhā. Its presence in
the manuscripts available to this study could be considered as due to a later scribal
insertion or even the result of an "improved" dittography (the aksara va in certain old
north Indian and Nepali scripts is easily confused with dha, n of ndha is often written
as anusvāra and may have been added later; an initial dittography could have pro-
duced atrobhayārthāsambhavāsambhavād). It would seem more likely, however, that
abhisambandha did indeed stand in both the manuscripts used for the PSP Tib
translation, and that the translators intentionally overlooked it because, following
their usual procedure for cited material, they inserted the present citation directly
from the Tibetan translation of the PP which, like the transmitted PsP Tib, reads 'di
la don gnyi ga med pa’i phyir ro (*atrobhayārthābhavāt). The author of the *LȚ
appears to have read sambandha in the manuscript of the PSP at his disposal: ubhayor
api pakṣayo[r] vīpsoktety anūdya tayo[r] vīpsayor atrāpi sambandhābhāvaḥ (cf.
Yonezawa 2004: 121, 130 [fol. 1b4]); his employment of sambandhābhāvaḥ as the
gloss for PsP's ᵒabhisambandhāsambhavāt could indicate that he knew PP's reading
°abhāvāt and combined this with PsP's sambandha. Candrakīrti may have con-
sidered his abhisambandhāsambhavāt as providing a more precise meaning, or he
may have been using a manuscript of the PP which actually contained this reading.
De Jong (1978: 29) suggested in his Textcritical Notes, on the basis of ms D and
against Tib, that abhisambandha be included and that the compound be emended to
atra dvayārthābhisambandhāsambhavād.
77 Candrakīrti cites from the PP (see previous note). PP Tib reads: de yang mi rung
ste | mig dang gzugs rnams la brten nas mig gi rnam par shes pa 'byung ngo zhes
gsungs pa 'di la don gnyi ga med pa'i phyir ro || (D 46b3-4; P 54b8-55a1).
78
De La Vallée Poussin (cf. PsP₁ 9, n. 1), conjecturing the reading katham an[enai]va
tatprāpte[h] sambhava for the text now changed to katham asambhavaḥ, notes that
the reading in his manuscripts is "plus que douteuse." The paper manuscripts attest
katham anava tetprāpte sambhava and connected variants. Ms Q attests the correct
reading katham asambhava. PsP Tib for the entire sentence reads: ji ltar med ces bya
ba’i rigs pa ma bkod pas | dam bca' ba tsam yin pa'i phyir ro. Ms P is unreadablePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
31
owing to damage from (and including) yad uktam up to (but not including) iti
yuktyanupādānena. The damaged area would allow for 26-27 akṣaras, but not the 29
expected on the basis of the evidence in the paper manuscripts or the 30 expected by
de La llée Poussin.
The words ji ltar med (ce na) appear twice in the PPT in the context of Avalokita-
vrata's introduction to his presentation of the respective reasons for the impossibility
of the application of the two etymologies to the Canonical statement: de dang de la
rten cing phrad nas 'byung ba'o zhes bya ba dang so sor 'jig pa dang ldan pa rnams
kyi 'byung ba zhes bya ba'i don de gnyi ga med pa'i phyir te | de dang de la rten cing
phrad nas 'byung ba zhes bya ba'i don de ji ltar med ce na ... so sor 'jig pa dang Idan
pa rnams kyi 'byung ba zhes bya ba’i don de ji ltar med ce na ... (D 29b1; P 34b7 and
D 29b5; P 35a4).
Stcherbatsky (1927: 88, n. 2) emends de La Vallée Poussin's katham an[enai]va
tatprāpte[h] to katham anava(ga)te 'prāpte sambhavaḥ and translates, "Because 'how
is it that (one thing) will arise when (the other) is not attained, not reached'?” It is
difficult to explain the paper manuscripts' anava tatprāpte, but the interpolated
words (presumably originally in a meaningful form) may have been inserted by a
scribe or scholar who was influenced by the ideas presented in the next sentence
(vijñānasya cakṣuṣā prāptir nāsti rūpiņām eva tatprāptidarśanāt).
7⁹ The question "Why is it not possible?" (katham asambhavaḥ; ji ltar med) is
addressed by Avalokitavrata who takes pains to present reasons for Bhāviveka's
judgement of the two etymologies as unsuitable with respect to the Canonical
statement (see PPȚ D 29b1-6; P 34a6-35a6). He argues against the first etymology by
taking recourse to an authoritative verse: de dang de la rten cing phrad nas 'byung ba
zhes bya ba’i don de ji ltar med ce na | de’i phyir lung las | de ni mig dang gzugs la
med || de gnyis bar na’ang yod ma yin || gang du de ni gnas 'gyur ba || de yod ma yin
de med min ||. He explains that visual consciousness, not existing [already] in the
visual faculty, in what is visible, or somewhere between the two, does not exist, and
therefore cannot depend on its causes and conditions (Hopkins [1983: 166] interprets
this to mean: "According to Avalokitavrata, Bhāvaviveka’s objection is based on the
principle that phenomena which meet must be simultaneously existent, ..."); or if
visual consciousness does exist, there is no point in it arising again. Against the
second etymology (so sor jig pa dang ldan pa rnams kyi 'byung ba zhes bya ba’i don
de ji ltar med ce na), he argues that since causes and conditions cannot form a causal
complex or produce an effect because they are perishing every single moment and
would already be inexistent at the time of the arising [of an alleged effect], the
arising of an effect cannot exist; neither can one say of effects which perish each
moment that they have an arising because they perish each moment at the time of
arising: 'di ltar rgyu dang rkyen so sor nges pa skad cig so so re re la 'jig pa gang
dag yin pa de dag ni 'byung ba'i tshe yongs su ma grub pa'i gnas skabs kho nar skad
cig re re la 'gag cing med par 'gyur bas tshogs shing 'bras bu bskyed par 'gyur ba (P:
bas) med pas 'bras bu 'byung ba yang med de | 'bras bu yang 'byung ba'i tshe nyid na
skad cig re re la 'jig par 'gyur ba'i phyir (D: without phyir) so sor 'jig pa dang Idan
pa rnams kyi 'byung ba zhes bya ba de yang med do ||.32
TRANSLATION
§10. But if this would be the intention [of Bhāviveka's criticism]: On
account of the immateriality (arūpitva) of consciousness, there is no
attaining (prāpti) [of, that is, no direct contact] with the visual faculty
because it is observed that only material things attain [that is, can
have contact with] it—this too is not correct, because attaining is
The fact that Avalokitavrata does not, as far as I am aware, address any of
Candrakīrti's scathing criticisms of Bhāviveka's views in his PPT but does exert
himself to provide answers to this question suggests that the question may have been
raised by another Buddhist of the sixth or early seventh century who was familiar
with the PP, possibly by another MMK commentator. As Kajiyama (1968) has
shown, Avalokitavrata defends Bhāviveka on other occasions against both
Dharmapāla and Sthiramati (Dr. Junjie Chu informs me that the question does not
appear in the first chapter of Sthiramati's commentary on the MMK). Van der Kuijp
places Avalokitavrata's floruit at the beginning of the mid-seventh c. (see van der
Kuijp 2006: 182; see also 174-182).
Candrakīrti's critique that Bhāviveka has presented only a "mere thesis" turns one of
Bhāviveka's chief weapons for discrediting the statements of his opponents i.e., his
recurring charge that his opponents argue with mere theses which lack reasons and
examples back against him.
statement
8⁰ Candrakīrti has in the previous sentence criticized Bhāviveka for not properly
explaining why he deems both etymologies inapplicable as regards the Canonical
cribing the arising of visual onsciousness. He now focusses on a
possible reason for Bhāviveka's rejection of the first etymology-indeed the one
Candrakīrti accepts by supposing that Bhāviveka considers prāpti in a very literal,
i.e., physical, sense as an actual meeting, touching. (Thus while Candrakīrti
introduced the Canonical statement “Depending on the visual faculty and visibles,
visual consciousness arises" solely for the sake of arguing against the second
etymology's interpretation of prati as "distribution,” he interprets Bhāviveka's
reference to it to be for the sake of showing especially/additionally the inapplicability
of the first etymology's interpretation of pratītya as prāpti.)
Stcherbatsky (1927: 88) understands cakṣuṣā as the agent of the action implied by
prāpti and translates, “Consciousness being mental (and the sense of vision physical),
the first cannot be reached by the second. Experience teaches that only material
things can be reached by the sense of vision," an interpretation that switches the
focus from consciousness attaining the visual faculty—the sense of the Canonical
statement quoted by Bhāviveka-to the visual faculty attaining consciousness (PSP
Tib's mig dang phrad pa supports my interpretation). His decision to translate as he
does may have been influenced by the well-known discussion on whether the senses
"attain" their objects. Alternatively, he may have decided to translate thus because it
is certainly not observed in daily life that material things touch the visual faculty, the
clear, subtle matter on the pupil of the eye arranged in the shape of a cumin flower.
This differentiation of the sense faculty per se and the fleshy, visible eye (golaka)PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
33
also accepted [in contexts such as that presented in the statement],
"This monk is one who has attained the fruit (prāptaphala).”
9981
§11. And because the word "attaining" (prāpya) is synonymous with
the word "relying" (apeksya). [That is,] others [i.e., the present
scholar and his circle82 maintain that Bhäviveka's] criticism is also
not appropriate on account of the fact that the Master Nāgārjuna
accepts the word "depending" (pratītya) as having precisely the
meaning of "attaining” (prāpya),83 [as demonstrated in the Yukti-
şaṣṭikā verse-half:]
would seem to have been set to the side in this argument, although it could also be
argued that material things are indeed capable of touching the subtle matter of the
visual faculty itself.
81 It is unclear whether Candrakīrti is citing from āgama here (the sentence does not
occur in the Pāli Canon) or merely taking as his example a common expression. The
compound prāptaphala occurs, e.g., at AKBhed 108.23. Cp. the compound phalapatto
in MN-attha IV.39: Idha bhikkhu attano vasanaṭṭhānam pavisitvā nisinno mūla-
kammaṭṭhānam manasikaroti. Tassa tam manasikaroto obhāso uppajjati, ayam
pathamamaggo nāma, so dutiyam obhāsañāṇam nibbatteti dutiyamaggo adhigato
hoti, evam tatiyam catutthañ ca; ettāvatā maggappatto c'eva phalapatto ca hotī ti;
and in VM 634 (VM₁ 758) in the context of the vipassanūpakkilesa: Tattha obhāso ti
vipassanobhāso. Tasmim uppanne yogāvacaro: na vata me ito pubbe evarūpo obhāso
uppannapubbo! Addhā maggappatto 'smi! Phalapatto ’smī ti amaggam eva maggo ti
aphalam eva ca phalan ti gaṇhāti (cf. also VM 637). Cp. also MN-attha III.269-270
(ad MN II.27-28; see MN 1283, n. 774, 776, etc.), in the context of the cessation of
the unwholesome habits and intentions; e.g. III.269: akusalānam sīlānam nirodhāya
paṭipanno ti ettha yāva sotāpattimaggā nirodhāya paṭipanno nāma hoti, phalapattena
(variant: phalapatte) pana te nirodhitā nāma honti.
66
82 *LT's author comments: apara ity anenātmānam nirdiśati candrakīrtiḥ (cf.
Yonezawa 2004: 121, 130 [fol. 1b4]). Bhāviveka commenced his criticism of the two
etymologies by referring to himself as apara (gzhan ma yin pa ni de yang mi rung).
Avalokitavrata identifies apara as Bhāviveka (see Ames 1993: 237, n. 33). De La
Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 8, n. 7), commenting on the appellation in the PP, notes,
gzhan ma yin pa ni; c'est-à-dire, littéralement, a-paraḥ: ce terme désignant Bhāva-
viveka, l'auteur lui-même, par opposition aux eke et aux anye.” Candrakīrti, who
tends to "recycle" Bhāviveka's words and phrases to add stylistic punch to his cri-
ticism of him, here appropriates the appellation, possibly setting it in the plural to
emphasize that not only he considers Bhāviveka's critique to be ungrounded.
83 Ms Q's reading prāptyarthasya caiva at first seems preferable to ms P’s and the
paper manuscripts' reading prāpyārthasyaiva (cf. PsP for the latter's variants).
Following Q, the sentence would read: “And since the word “attaining” (prāpya) is
M34
TRANSLATION
synonymous with the word "relying" (apekṣya), and due to the fact that the Master
Nāgārjuna accepts the word "depending" (pratītya) as having precisely the meaning
of "attaining" (prāpti), [as demonstrated in the YȘ verse-half ….., according to others
[i.e., the present scholar and his circle], [Bhāviveka’s] critici
is also not appro-
priate." I accept, however, P's reading because the sentence in Q appears to have
been tampered with, leading one to suspect that its ca is also the result of determined
change. Ms P's and the paper manuscripts' prāpya (of prāpyārthasyaiva) appears to
have been changed in ms Q to prāpti (prāptyarthasya), possibly due to the influence
of the earlier instances of prāpti conjoined with artha. Note that PsP Tib supports the
reading prāpya with phrad nas (prāptyartha was earlier translated as phrad pa'i don).
Ms P's unemended presentation of the text passage is, however, problematic, for as it
stands, the sentence beginning with prāpyaśabdasya cāpekṣyaśabdaparyāyatvāt
carries on, i.e., is part of, the previous paragraph's sentence refuting Bhāviveka's
(hypothetical) argument that immaterial consciousness cannot "attain,” i.e., directly
contact, the visual faculty (the initial reason Candrakīrti gives is: “because attaining
is also accepted [in contexts such as that presented in the statement], 'This monk is
one who has attained the fruit [prāptaphala]””); there is no daṇḍa in P after prāpta-
phalo 'yam bhikṣur ity api prāptyabhyupagamāt. Ms P would thus present a new
reason, supported by a subordinate reason, against the objection that something
immaterial cannot contact the visual faculty. In unemended P, this reason is: "and
because, since the word “attaining” (prāpya) is synonymous with the word "relying"
(apeksya), the Master Nāgārjuna accepts the word "depending" (pratītya) as having
precisely the meaning of "attaining” (prāpya), [as demonstrated in the YȘ verse-
half:] ... ." Ms P places a daṇḍa after this second reason, thus setting off the follow-
ing dūṣaṇam api nopapadyata ity apare as an independent sentence. Bhāviveka's
objection in regard to consciousness not being able to physically contact the visual
faculty has, I would argue, been taken care of with Candrakīrti's reference to the
well-known statement regarding attainment of the fruit, and further arguments are
not really necessary. Even though the new argument could been seen as clarifying
how prāpya in the context of passages focussed on immaterial things should be
understood, the inclusion of Nāgārjuna's YṢ verse would seem to point to the new
reason being independent of the objection concerning immaterial things contacting
only material ones, and as having as its aim a more fundamental refutation of
Bhāviveka's (cited) PP critique, specifically with respect to presumed doubt about or
even rejection of the word pratītya as equivalent to prāpya. If a daṇḍa is set after
prāptaphalo 'yam bhikṣur ity api prāptyabhyupagamāt in ms P, then P's
prapyaśabdasya capekṣyaśabdaparyāyatvāt introduces the new rebuttal. When a
further danda is placed after prāpyaśabdasya cāpekṣyaśabdaparyāyatvāt, P’s reading
prāpyārthasyaiva makes perfect sense. Interestingly, Q does attest a daṇḍa after etad
api na yuktam prāptaphalo 'yam bhikṣur ity api prāptyabhyupagamāt as well as after
prāpyaśabdasya cāpekṣyaśabdaparyāyatvāt; both seem to belong to the PsP's text. Of
course, like P's danda-emended text, Q's text with prāptyarthasya caiva can also be
understood as introducing a new idea not associated with the immateriality
argument—in this case two new reasons―based on an assumption of Bhāviveka's35
That which has arisen attaining this and that [cause] has not
arisen by own nature.
84
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
resistance to the equating of pratītya and prāpya. But as stated, given that an
interfering hand appears to have changed an original prāpya in Q to prāpti, and given
that Q's ca smooths a lectio difficilior, I accept P's reading without ca.
In contrast to my understanding of the section, the translators of PsP Tib appear to
see Candrakīrti presenting not one, but three consecutive reasons for his assertion
that Bhāviveka's critique is inapplicable if it is motivated by the idea that immaterial
things cannot come into contact with material ones. As my investigation of the
manuscripts has shown, PsP Tib was influenced by interpolated readings in one of
the two Skt manuscripts its translators relied on, many of which also appear in Q;
PSP Tib may have adopted the same ca that Q attests. PsP Tib reads: de yang mi rigs
te|dge slong 'di ni 'bras bu thob pa yin no zhes bya ba 'dir phrad pa khas blangs pa'i
phyir dang phrad nas zhes bya ba’i sgra yang (= ca) ltos nas zhes bya ba’i sgra’i
rnam grangs yin pa'i phyir dang | rten cing 'brel par zhes bya ba'i sgra ni | ... (YȘ
19ab) zhes slob dpon klu sgrub kyis kyang phrad nas zhes bya ba'i don nyid du zhal
gyis bzhes pa'i phyir ro || des na skyon yang mi 'thad do zhes gzhan dag zer ro ||
(translated in Hopkins 1983: 671; Hopkins structures his translation as follows: "This
is not admissible because [scriptural citation]. Also, the term ‘having met' ... is a
synonym of the term 'having relied' ... . Also, the master Nāgārjuna Therefore,
others [Chandrakīrti himself] say that even [Bhāvaviveka's] refutation is not
admissible." The PsP Tib translators have considered it necessary to begin their final
sentence with a non-Sanskrit-attested des na (this inspired de La Vallée Poussin to
introduce a conjectured tataḥ into his edition); their translation gives the impression
that they too were confronted with a daṇḍa before dūṣaṇam api nopapadyate ity
apare. Note that Candrakīrti's refutation of Bhāviveka's (hypothetical) argument that
contact (prāpti) of immaterial things with material ones is impossible already
contains the phrase etad api na yuktam; when the reasons preceding dūṣaṇam api
nopapadyate ity apare are understood as belonging to this specific refutation, one has
little choice but to construe dūṣaṇam api nopapadyate ity apare as an independent
sentence.
tr
84 YŞ 19ab: tat tat prāpya yad utpannam notpannam tat svabhāvataḥ | (for Sanskrit
citations of the kārikā, see YṢV, 188, n. 290). YȘ 19ab Tib (Pa tshab YȘ translation):
de dang de brten gang 'byung de || rang gi dngos por skyes ma yin ||; YȘ 19ab as
translated in YSV Tib (Ye shes sde, etc., YSV translation): de dang de brten gang
byung ba || rang bzhin du ni de ma skyes ||. In his commentary on the YŞ half-verse,
Candrakīrti glosses tat tat prāpya with tat tad apeksya: de dang de brten zhes bya ba
ni de dang de la bltos zhes bya ba'i tha tshig go ||. He explicates the words "tat tat" as
referring to the respective causes of the members of the twelve-linked chain of
dependent-arising, i.e., the causes responsible for the rebirth of the individual, and to
the respective causes of the factors involved in the arising of the external cosmos: de
dang de zhes bya ba spyir bsnyag pa thams cad bsdu ba’i phyir tshig 'dis nang gi ma
rig pa la sogs pa dang phyi'i rlung gi dkyil 'khor la sogs pa ma lus pa dag 'du byed la
sogs pa dang chu’i dkyil ’khor la sogs pa skye ba la rgyu’i dngos por gnas par gyur36
§12. And that too established as [his] (= Bhāviveka's) own opinion
[regarding the meaning of pratītyasamutpāda, as it was set forth by
him with]
TRANSLATION
What then [is the correct interpretation of pratītyasamutpāda]?
The meaning of "conditionality" (idampratyayatā)85 as expressed
in the statement "When this is present, that comes to be, from the
te. Scherrer-Schaub translates (cf. YȘV 189, see also n. 292), “Par l'expression 'ceci
et cela', du fait qu'elle a valeur distributive (spyir bsnyag pa) et qu'elle englobe
toutes choses (thams cad bsdu ba), toutes les catégories sans exception, nescience et
[autres catégories] internes, disque du vent (rlung gi dkyil 'khor) et [autre catégories]
externes, sont établies en tant que causes de la production des saņskāra, du disque de
l'eau et [ainsi de suite]."
The entire kārikā is cited at MABhed 228.12-15. De La Vallée Poussin, citing the Skt
for the kārikā from the Subhāṣitasamgraha, considers the reading for the third quarter
as doubtful; 19cd: svabhāve na yad utpannam utpannam nāma tat katham (see
MABH 1911: 278, n. 2). Lindtner, “in accordance with Tib. and a quotation occur-
ring in Advayavajrasamgraha (ed. Śāstrī), p. 25," emends the otherwise metrical
third quarter to read svabhāvena yan notpannam (see 1982b: 108 and 109, n. 19). His
emendation, however, renders the quarter unmetrical, such that it agrees neither with
the pathyā anuṣṭubh of the other three quarters nor with any vipulās.
See YSV 188, n. 290 for further references to the kārikā and comparable verses.
tr
85 idampratyayatā, literally, “being something whose condition is this,” “the fact of
having this as condition.” Cf. SN II.25.31-33: uppādā vā Tathāgatānam anuppādā vā
Tathāgatānam || thitā va sā dhātu dhammaṭṭhitată dhammaniyāmatā idappaccayatā ||
"Whether there is an arising of Tathāgatas or no arising of Tathāgatas, that 'element
still persists, the stableness of the Dhamma, the fixed course of the Dhamma, specific
conditionality" (translation Bodhi 2000: 551, see also his n. 51); ¹Bodhi’s “element”
should rather be translated as “law” or “[true] nature [of things]" – see Schmithausen
1969: 146f. Cf. also SN 1.298-299 where conditionality and dependent-arising are
presented side-by-side as synonyms. Cf. the Buddhist opponent's equating of the two
as characteristics of ultimate truth at PsP₁ 159.6; Candrakīrti, defining the teaching of
dependent-arising as referring to conditionality at YȘVed 22.3, declares this teaching
to be the cause for the seeing of the two truths (see also YȘV 109, n. 21). The
Madhyamaka reinterpretation of dependent-arising from a principle expressing the
way in which real effects arise from real causes to the signifier of the conditioned-
ness of all things, a fact that entails and proves their lack of real existence, becomes a
powerful means for refuting views and arguments that maintain a svabhāva of things
(cf. MABhed 228.5-11). It is nevertheless the conditionality of worldly things that
allows for the assertion of them and seen from the (ultimately erroneous) point of
view of the world allows for their "establishment” on the level of the surface truth;
cf. PsP₁ 189.1-3, PsP₁ 234.6 and YȘVed 84.3-5. Further references at PsP₁ 9, n. 8 and
May 1959: 122, n. 319.
tr
LPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
37
arising of this, that arises," is the meaning of pratītya-
samutpāda,
87
is not appropriate because a specific meaning for each of the words
pratītya and samutpāda has not been stated and because an analysis
(vyutpāda) of it [i.e., of the compound pratītyasamutpāda] was
intended.
§13. Even if [Bhāviveka,] having accepted the word
pratītyasamutpāda as a word that is employed in a conventional sense
(rūḍhisabda), like "sesame in the forest," etc., (aranyetilakādi) [the
L
86 Sanskrit: asmin satīdam bhavaty asyotpādād idam utpadyate; Pāli: imasmim sati
idam hoti imass' uppādā idam uppajjati (e.g., MN I.262-263, II.32, III.63; SN II.28.7,
II.65.5-6; further references at Pāsādika 1989: 60; PsP₁ 9, n. 7; La Vallée Poussin
1913a: 50, n. 1). De La Vallée Poussin (1913a: 49) asserts that the statement is “[1]a
plus archaïque des formules de causation." On preformulaic expressions of the idea,
see Nakamura 1980. The formula as found in the Canonical texts is usually followed
by or occurs in close proximity to its negated form: imasmim asati idam na hoti
imassa nirodhā idam nirujjhati. Nakamura points out that although the formula is
usually set forth in connection with the twelve-linked dependent-arising, it is also
referred to independently, as at MN II.32 in a conversation about past and future
lives. In the AKBh, Vasubandhu presents a number of views that explain the
apparent repetition of meaning in the sentences asmin satīdam bhavati and
asyotpādād idam utpadyate, views worked out, at least in part, to defend the Buddhist
citing the formula in debate from the opponent's charge of paunaruktya (repetition),
a point of defeat (nigrahasthāna); see AKBhed 138.28-139.24; AKBh III.81-83;
Stalker 1987: 193-198; La Vallée Poussin 1913a 50-51. See also the formula as cited
from the Paramārthaśūnyatāsūtra at MABhed 226.16-18.
Cf. also the Buddhist opponent's presentation of the formula at PSP₁ 159.7-10. For
Nāgārjuna and Candrakīrti, the formula belongs exclusively to the level of the
surface truth (samvṛtisatya), inapplicable to the ultimate (paramārtha) level because
nothing exists there; cf. MMK I.10: bhāvānāṁ niḥsvabhāvānām na sattā vidyate
yataḥ satīdam asmin bhavatīty etan naivopapadyate ||. Although not relevant to the
formula as used in the PSP, see also the unusual interpretation of the formula set forth
by Prajñākaragupta in Franco 2007.
87 Candrakīrti is citing from Bhāviveka's PP. PP Tib: 'o na gang yin zhe na | 'di yod
na (PsP: 'di yod pas) 'di 'byung la 'di skyes pa'i phyir 'di skye ba ste zhes bya ba
rkyen 'di dang ldan pa nyid kyi don ni | rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba'i don to (P: ||)
zhes zer ro || (PP D 46b4; P 55a1-2). Cf. AKBhed 138.17-18: eṣa tu vākyārthaḥ | asmin
saty asya bhāvaḥ, asyotpādād idam utpadyata iti yo 'rthaḥ so 'rthaḥ pratītyasa-
mutpāda iti |.38
TRANSLATION
meaning of which does not correspond to its individual parts],88 states
[the meaning] in this way [i.e., as above, "when this is present, that
comes to be, from the arising of this, that arises," etc.], that too is not
suitable, because the Ācārya [Nāgārjuna] accepts that the [compound]
word pratītyasamutpāda precisely corresponds to the meaning of its
members, [as evident in the YS verse-half:]
That which has arisen attaining this and that [cause] has not
arisen by own nature.
89
§14. But with [pratītyasamutpāda] being explained [as]
When this is present, that comes to be, as when there's short,
there's long,"
9990
88 Cf. the entry for rūḍha/rūḍhi in Renou 1957: 259: “rūḍhi ‘sens traditionnel
(conventionnel)' d'un mot, opp. à yoga ... [u]n mot de rº est caractérisé par le fait que
la dérivation n'y est pas sujette à règle (vyutpatter aniyamaḥ)." "Sesame in the
forest" (aranyetilaka) is given as an example in Kāś to Pā 2.1.44's “samjñāyām,”
according to which a word ending in the seventh case marker is compounded with a
word ending in a case marker and becomes a tatpuruṣa compound [i.e., the seventh
case marker is not elided] when this compound is an appellative. Wild sesame does
not yield oil and is thus used as a designation for anything that does not answer to
one's expectations; the meaning of araṇyetilaka therefore is not derived directly from
the meaning of its component parts. *LȚ comments: avyutpanna evāyam aranye-
tilakaśabdaḥ (ms: ᵒkāśabdaḥ) (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 121, 130 [fol. 1b4]). Other such
compounds mentioned in Kāś are vanekimśuka (a blossoming Butea frondosa tree in
a forest), vanebilvaka (a wood-apple tree in a forest), and kūpepiśācaka (a demon in a
well), all used as designations for things found unexpectedly.
89 Candrakīrti again cites YŞ 19ab. See n. 84.
90 Cp. RÃ I.48: asmin satīdam bhavati dīrghe hrasvam yathā sati | asyotpādād
udetīdam dīpotpādād yathā prabhā ||. RÃ I.48 is cited at MABhed 227.1-4 as: 'di yod
pas na 'di 'byung dper || ring po yod na thung ngu bzhin || 'di skyes pas na 'di skye
dper || mar me 'byung bas ’od bzhin no || (RĀ Tib as MABh Tib but with the variant
ring po yod pas thung ngu bzhin). The citation here in the PsP presents the order
hrasve dirgham (PsP Tib translates accordingly) instead of dīrghe hrasvam as in the
RĀ and the corresponding Tib of the MABh. Hahn (1982: 20, n. 48b) records that
both RĀ Tib and RÃ Chinese support the text of RĀ I.48b. If Candrakīrti is actually
citing from the RĀ, it is possible, given that the metre is not affected by the reading
found in PsP, that he simply reversed the order of long and short, possibly influenced
by the fact that RÃ I.49 commences with hrasve in the initial position: hrasve 'sati
punar dirgham. He may alternatively have had a RÃ manuscript, or been familiar
with an RÃ tradition, that presented I.48 as he cites it.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
isn't it the case that exactly that [which we maintain] ends up being
accepted, [namely,] depending on [something] short, [i.e.,] attaining
[something] short, relying on [something] short, [something else]
comes to be [that which is] long?⁹¹ And thus [Bhāviveka] accepts
exactly what he criticizes this is not reasonable. Enough of this
digression.
92
39
-
§15. Therefore, [the positions] that things arise without a cause
(ahetu), from a single cause (ekahetu), or from a non-corresponding
cause (viṣamahetu),"2 and [the positions] that they are created from
Cp. MABhed 150.9-10: dper na ring po yod na thung ngur 'gyur la thung ngu yod na
ring por 'gyur zhing | pha rol yod na tshu rol du 'gyur la tshu rol yod na pha rol tu
'gyur ba ltar btags par 'gyur gyi de dag la grub pa rang bzhin pa med do ||; ŚSV ed
250.35-36: pha rol dang tshu rol bzhin nam ring po dang thung ngu bzhin rgyu dang
'bras bu dang phan tshun ltos pa dang bcas pa’i phyir ngo bo nyid kyis grub pa med
do ; also PSP₁ 458.14-15 (pārāvaravat. hrasvadīrghavat); 459.5 and 459.9; 101.14
(pārāvaravat); YȘVed 71.18-19 (ring po dang | thung du (read: ngu) bzhin du ’am |
mar me'i 'od bzhin); RÃ I.95 (ring dang thung).
91 The Naiyāyikas Vātsyāyana and Uddyotakara present and critique the
Madhyamaka short-long example for dependent existence in their commentaries on
NS IV.1.39 (na svabhāvasiddhir āpekṣikatvāt) and IV.1.40. Vātsyāyana presents the
pūrvapakṣa thus: apekṣākṛtam āpekṣikam | hrasvāpekṣākṛtam dīrgham dīrghāpekṣā-
kṛtam ca hrasvam na svenātmanāvasthitam kiñcit | kasmāt? apekṣāsāmarthyāt |
tasmān na svabhāvasiddhir bhāvānām || (NBh 238.5-7). Vātsyāyana asks if a long
thing is “made” in reliance on a short one, and the short one is without reliance [in
this special relationship], in reliance on what other thing then will the short one be
grasped as short? Thus when one of two things that are mutually reliant does not
exist, since the other cannot exist without it, neither can exist. Thus, the establish-
ment of reliance as presented by the Mādhyamika is not appropriate: yadi hrasvāpe-
kṣākṛtam dīrgham, hrasvam anāpekṣikam | kim īdānīm apekṣya hrasvam iti gṛhyate?
atha dirghāpekṣākṛtam hrasvam, dīrgham anāpekṣikam, kim īdānīm apekṣya dīrgham
iti grhyate? evam itaretarāśrayayor ekābhāve 'nyatarābhāvād ubhayābhāva ity ape-
kṣāvyavasthānupapannā | (NBh 238.10-13; cp. NV 453.10-12). Among other reason-
ings, Uddyotakara argues that reliance between things is possible only when an own-
being of things is established: svabhāvasiddhau cāsatyām apekṣā na prāpnoti | (NV
454.1).
92 The same triad is found in Candrakīrti's commentary on CŚ VIII.8 (CŚṬed 128.3-
5): yatra samsārapravṛttikramo 'vidyāsamskārādinā krameṇāhetvekahetuviṣamahetu-
vināśārtham svasāmānyalakṣaṇasatyatvakalpanayā deśyate | jñātavyam viduṣā
pravṛttis tatra varṇyata iti . Although one finds ahetu and visamahetu discussed
together in certain Pāli texts, the string ahetvekahetuvisamahetu does not seem to
occur in the Pāli texts; Candrakīrti may have known it from the works of other40
self, other, or both [self and other], end up refuted through the
Exalted One illuminating in this way the arising of things in reliance
on causes and conditions. And because they are refuted, the surface
(sāmvṛta) own nature of surface things, just as it is, becomes
revealed.93 Now because just that surface [level] dependent-arising
(pratītyasamutpāda) has not arisen by own nature it is, with respect to
the gnosis of the Nobles, qualified by the eight qualifiers beginning
with "without cessation" in the sense that cessation (nirodha), up to
and including going (nirgama),"4 are not found in it." And the way in
which cessation and so forth do not exist for dependent-arising will
be explained by the entire treatise. Even though infinite qualifiers are
possible for dependent-arising, there is the employment of just these
94
95
TRANSLATION
schools. *LT exemplifies single cause (ekahetu) with īśvara and non-corresponding
cause (viṣamahetu) with nityānityahetutvam (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 121, 130 [fol.
1b4]). Cp. Mūlapaṇṇāsa-ṭīkā: “Natthi hetu natthi paccayo sattānam samkilesāyā” ti
ādinayappavattā ahetukadiṭṭhi. "Issarapurisapajāpatipakati-aṇukālādhīhi loko
pavattati nivattati cā” ti pavattā visamahetudiṭṭhi (Chaṭṭha Sangāyana CD s.v. visa-
mahetudiṭṭhi; the same explanation appears in Khandhavagga-ṭīkā). See also AS
where the exposition of pratītyasamutpāda is said to be for the sake of abandoning
attachment to ātman and the wrong ideas that dharmas originate from non-causes and
non-corresponding causes: ahetuviṣamahetukātmābhiniveśatyājanārtham (cf. Gokha-
le 1947: 26); Kritzer (1999: 23 and n. 34) draws attention to the fact that the ASBh
on the AS statement exemplifies visamahetu with īśvara.
93 The 12-limbed formula of dependent-arising elucidating the causes of rebirth and
of suffering (and thereby indicating the factors that must be eradicated for their
elimination) and external dependent-arising considered as explaining the unfolding of
the cosmos, both described in the Canon, and dependent-arising extended to all
factors of existence (which in the Abhidharma schools becomes accepted as a general
principle underlying all causal interaction [cf., e.g., Cox 1993]), are all accepted by
the Mādhyamikas on the surface level. However, nothing real arises by way of
dependent-arising, for that which arises in dependence is bereft of own-being. The
surface things (sāmvṛtāḥ padārthāḥ) are fictions, recognized as such by the Nobles
who consider dependently arisen things to be similar to the objects created by a
magician. ŚSV on ŚS kārikā 1 distinguishes sāmvṛta and pāramārthika; see Erb
1997: 212.23ff. and 37ff.
94
In order that the qualifier given accords with the final one of the translated Tibetan
verse, PSP Tib must refer to don gcig instead of 'gro ba.
95
Paraphrased in Seyfort Ruegg 1977: 4. PsP Tib's explanation of the individual
words of the introductory verses is inserted here.41
eight because they are predominantly the limbs (i.e., major topics) of
debate (vivādānga)."
96
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§16. And since manifoldness (prapañca), characterized as name
(abhidhāna) and what is named (abhidheya), etc.,97 stops in all
tr
96 Buddhapalita responds in detail to the questioner in BP who asks why all eight
qualifiers are refuted and who suggests that the refutation of just the first four is
sufficient, namely, of nirodha, utpāda, uccheda and śāśvata: 'dir smras pa | ci'i phyir
'gag pa la sogs pa brgyad po de dag 'gog par byed | 'gag pa med pa skye med pa ||
chad pa med pa rtag med pa || zhes bya ba de tsam zhig byas pas mi chog gam (see
BPed 4.23-5.2). He answers that proponents of an own-being of things generally teach
that things are existent by way of these eight, and that whoever reflects on reality or
starts a debate does so in reliance on ideas of cessation and so forth. As support for
his assertion, Buddhapālita cites persons who declare that "All things, [in that they]
are subject to arising and ceasing, are momentary and occur in continuous sequence
(*prabandhena pravartante)" (re zhig kha cig na re dngos po thams cad ni skye ba
dang 'gag pa’i chos can skad cig ma ste rgyun gyis rgyun du 'byung ngo || zhes zer ro)
and then lists various opponents who argue for the eternity, identity, difference and
movement of specific substances and/or qualities posited by their respective systems
(Saito identifies the former group as Vaibhāṣikas; all identifications in the following
rely on Saito 1984; see BP 5). The eternalist views presented are those of the
Sānkhyas, who maintain that primordial matter (prakṛti) and spirit (purușa) are
eternal, of the Vaiśeṣikas, who hold that the ten substances such as earth (pṛthivi),
etc., are eternal, and of the Jainas, whom Buddhapālita describes as maintaining that
the six substances, viz., principle of movement (dharma), principle of rest
(adharma), space (ākāśa), time (kāla), matter (pudgala) and soul (jīva) are eternal.
These schools are additionally said to dispute in regard to whether the soul and body,
fire and fuel, cause and effect, quality and qualificand, and part and whole are
identical or different. As examples of schools that propound movement, the Sankhyas
are presented as maintaining that the [three] constituents of primordial matter (guṇa)
possess activity and that the subtle body (linga) transmigrates (kha cig na re yon tan
bya ba dang ldan pa rnams dang rtags 'khor ro zhes zer ro [BPed 5.19]), the
Vaiseșikas(?) as claiming that atoms and mind (manas) move (BPed 5.20 attests gzhan
dag na re rdul dang yid gnyis ni mi 'gro’o zhes zer ro; the negation appears to be an
error), and again the Jainas as maintaining that both soul and matter have/possess
movement ('gro ba dang ldan) and that the soul ascends upon attaining perfection
(on this last point an example for nirgama-see Frauwallner 1984: 207f.)
⁹7 PSP Tib: brjod bya dang rjod byed dang | mtshan nyid dang mtshon bya la sogs pa
(*abhidheyābhidhānalakṣaṇalakṣyādi) for abhidhānābhidheyādilakṣaṇa. Supportive
of the Sanskrit is the fact that Candrakīrti defines prapañca elsewhere as having the
characteristic (lakṣaṇa) of speech (see the following note). One would further expect
the order mtshon bya dang mtshan nyid (similar to the order brjod bya dang rjod
byed) were PSP Tib to reflect the original reading. mtshon bya thus appears to be a42
TRANSLATION
respects for the Nobles when they see dependent-arising as it really
is, that very dependent-arising is called "the calming of
manifoldness" (prapañcopaśama)⁹8 in the sense that there is the
later determined addition, which additionally required the movement of ādi to the
end of the compound. Tib's ādi, though relocated, supports ms P's reading over that
of ms Q, which lacks it.
⁹8 On prapañca (and the adjectives niṣprapañca and aprapañca), see especially
Schmithausen 1969: 137-142 [= n. 101] where the various aspects of prapañca in its
dual form of subjective mental acts and the objective products, or correlates thereof,
viz., the world of manifold appearances, as documented specifically, but not only, in
the Yogācāra school, are discussed. As Schmithausen (ibid., 140f.) explains,
prapañca as mental activity denotes a subjective act which is characterized by the
fact that the subject does not remain calmly in the direct vision of reality but rather
elevates above it or expands over it by reflecting and naming; depending on the
context, some passages set the content-oriented aspect of proliferation or transference
of manifold or false qualifications in the foreground, others the formal aspect of
mental activity or restlessness (on prapañca see also May 1959: 175-6, n. 562; Lugli
2011). In the sentence here in the PsP, Candrakīrti describes prapañca as both name
(abhidhāna) and the objects named (abhidheya) (on speech also as a mental act, cf.
Schmithausen 1969: 139.2.a). In his commentary on MMK XVIII.9, Candrakīrti
takes as his focus the subjective side of prapañca by defining it as speech, explaining
that it diversifies the objects perceived: prapañco hi vāk, prapañcayaty arthān iti
kṛtvā (PsP 373.9-10; cf. Schmithausen 1969: 137f. A.1.a.). Schmithausen (ibid., note
a) writes that speech as a mental act is often equated with prapañca but that speech is
also often considered the means of expression of the mental prapañca. In his
commentary on MMK XVIII.5 Candrakīrti describes prapañca as having the
characteristic of jñānajñeyavācyavācakakartṛkarmakaraṇakriyāghaṭapaṭamukuṭa-
ratharūpavedanāstrīpuruṣalābhālābhasukhaduḥkhayaśo’yaśonindāpraśamsādi, thus
all possible conceptualizing diversification connected with speech, which provides
the basis for and gives rise to inappropriate conceptuality (ayoniśo vikalpa). As stated
in MMK XVIII.5, all prapañca stops in emptiness, i.e., with the realization that
nothing exists; see Candrakīrti's continued commentary in which the ceasing of
prapañca and vikalpa, etc., in the absence of an object to be perceived is likened to
the non-descent of the "net" of prapañca for lustful persons in the absence of a
beautiful young woman.
Both the author of the ABh and Bhāviveka similarly define prapañca as naming
(*abhilāpa) in their commentaries on MMK XVIII.9: mngon par brjod pa'i mtshan
nyid kyi spros pa (ABhed 438.13-14; PP P 237b3). Commenting on MMK XVIII.5,
the author of the ABh states that prapañca is characterized by attachment to the truth
of linguistic and conceptual practice (tha snyad kyi bden pa la mngon par zhen pa’i
mtshan nyid kyi spros pa [ABhed 431.16-17]; Schmithausen [1969: 138] reconstructs
*vyavahārasatyābhiniveśalakṣaṇaḥ prapañcaḥ); that is, one becomes attached to the
content of the prapañca in the mistaken assumption that it is reality. BhāvivekaPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
100
43
calming of instances of manifoldness in it. And because [it] is entirely
without the misfortunes of birth, old age, death" and so forth owing
to the ceasing of [any] dealing with [the dichotomies] cognition
(jñāna) and cognizables (jñeya) in view [of the fact] that mind and
mental factors (cittacaitta) do not arise in it, it is “[ultimate] welfare”
(śiva).' Dependent-arising, qualified as stated, is indicated as the
[grammatical direct] object (karman) [for the verses] because it is
what is primarily aimed at (īpsitatamatvāt) by [the Exalted One's]
activity of teaching. 101
glosses prapanca of prapañcopaśama of the homage verse as brjod pa'i bdag nyid
(PP P 56a2-3; D 47a7-48a1: brjod pa’i bdag nyid [la] mngon par zhen pa zhi ba’i
phyir; la is attested in all citations of the sentence in PPT). Avalokitavrata explains
brjod pa as brjod par bya ba'i dngos po rnams mngon sum du byas te tshig gi sgrar
brjod pa "designation/expression in the sound of words once one has directly
perceived the things to be named” (PPȚ D 44a3-4; P 50b8). It might be noted that
Prajñākaramati’s BCAP citation of the Āryasatyadvayāvatārasūtra includes a
description of paramarthasatya as abhidheyābhidhānajñeyajñānavigata (BCAP
366.14).
99 PSP Tib adds the often associated further member "illness": skye ba dang rga ba
dang na ba dang 'chi ba la sogs pa.
100 The word siva of the homage verses has been interpreted and translated in various
ways by modern scholars, in some cases by way of the nouns "bliss,” “happiness,"
"beatitude," and the adjective "blissful.” Such translations are problematic because
they suggest, in the face of explicit Madhyamaka statements that it is the stopping of
consciousness (vijñāna) and thus the discontinuance of all conceptualizing and of all
(invariably temporary) positive and negative affects associated with and based on
conceptuality that makes way for the experience of nirvāṇa, that the attainment of
nirvāṇa may be equated with or entails the experience of a positive affect. Other
translators, primarily those translating from the Tibetan, where siva is rendered as zhi
ba, have elected to represent the word with adjectives such as "peaceful,” “tranquil,”
or "still." siva of the homage verses has also been inappropriately translated as
"auspicious."
It is important to give due accord to Candrakīrti's own clarification of the word siva.
With his explanation that pratītyasamutpāda is siva because it is free of the
misfortunes of birth, old age, death, etc. (jātijarāmaraṇādiniravaśeṣopadravarahita),
he stresses siva's historically prominent aspect of safety and freedom from harm.
Note that he uses the word upadrava to characterize that which is not siva (cf. PW
s.v. upadrava: widerwärtiger Zufall, Unfall ... Unheil). I therefore translate siva as
"[ultimate] welfare."
¹⁰¹ The reference here is to the definition of the grammatical object at Pā 1.4.49:
kartur īpsitatamam karma "the object is that which the agent most wishes to reach44
TRANSLATION
§17. [Homage verses I-IIa-d₁:]
[He] who fully awakened taught dependent-arising [which is]
Without cessation, without arising, without annihilation, not
eternal,
Without one thing, without separate things, without coming,
without going, 102
[through its action],” on which the Kāś comments: kartuḥ kriyayā yad āptum
iṣṭatamam tat kārakam karmasamjñam bhavati. Candrakīrti wishes to say that the
words of the homage verses have been purposely arranged to allow for pratītya-
samutpāda to be declined in the accusative case because pratītyasamutpāda is indeed
that which the agent (kartṛ), i.e., the Buddha, with his action (kriyā) of teaching, is
most intent upon.
This "pirouette" on the Pāṇinian sūtra appears to have been borrowed from Bhavi-
veka's PP. Bhāviveka includes this citation of Pā 1.4.49 when he defends all eight
qualifiers of dependent-arising being negated in ultimate reality: mdzad pa pos bstan
pa nyid kyis bzhed pa mchog yin pa'i phyir (PP D 47a7; P 56a2; see also PPT D
43b6-44a2; P 50b2-6). The sūtra is referred to again at PsP₁ 180.14, 324.10, and
465.2. For a non-traditional interpretation of Pa 1.4.49, see Oetke 2001b: 62ff.
102 Although the dependent-arising expounded in the homage verses as coterminous
with nirvāṇa pertains to the ultimate nature of dependently arisen things, i.e., to the
fact that dependently arisen things have in reality never arisen, the last six qualifiers
also appear in traditional expositions of dependent-arising. In the PP, Bhāviveka is in
fact confronted by a Buddhist opponent who argues that all eight qualifiers of
dependent-arising are accepted by śrāvakas and thus the composition of the MMK is
unnecessary. According to this opponent, dependent-arising is without arising in the
sense that a result different from, i.e., incongruous with, its conditions does not arise
(PP D 48a5; P 57b5: skye ba med pa ni de las gzhan skye ba med pa'i phyir; for the
previous and an alternative explanation, see PPȚ D 54b5-55a3; P 63a1-7); that which
arises would not be "without arising" in this sense in the case of arising from īśvara
(dper na dbang phyug las dngos po rnams mi skye’o zhes gsungs pa las na | dbang
phyug ma yin pa las dngos po rnams skye bar shes [PPȚ D 55a3-4; P 63a7]). This
same opponent considers dependent-arising to be without cessation because it is
without the ceasing imagined by the non-Buddhists (tīrthikas) such as that considered
as occurring when one says "without self" (for these and the other qualifiers, see PP
D 48a5-7; P 57a5-57b1; Kajiyama 1963: 46f.; Ames 1993: 219f.; La Vallée Poussin
1933: 11f.). Bhāviveka replies that his own view of dependent-arising greatly differs,
for the Madhyamaka teaches that arising has the nature of non-arising. Reference to
things not having arisen or ceased in this sense, i.e., as intended in the PsP homage
verses, is found throughout Prajñāpāramitā literature; cf. e.g., Asta 6.17; 135.11-15.
Traditional dependent-arising posited as involving the arising of real things from real
causes is praised by Conservative Buddhism as avoiding the extremes of eternalism
and nihilism. Cf. the Śālistambasūtra's statement regarding the arising of a sproutPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
45
from a seed: pratītyasamutpādaḥ katham na śāśvatata iti? yasmād anyo 'nkuro
'nyad bijam, na ca yad eva bījam sa evankuraḥ | atha vā punaḥ bijam nirudhyate,
ankuras cotpadyate | ato na śāśvatataḥ | katham nocchedataḥ? na ca pūrvaniruddhād
bījād ankuro niṣpadyate, nāpy aniruddhād bījāt, api ca, bījam ca nirudhyate, tasminn
eva samaye ŉkura utpadyate, tulādaṇḍonnāmāvanāmavat | ato nocchedataḥ (cf.
Schoening 1995: 285, 706; on internal (ādhyātmika) dependent-arising being without
eternity and annihilation see the Śālistambasūtra passage quoted in PsP at PsP₁ 569.1-
9; cp. Schoening 1995: 324, 731f.). Cf. also Candrakīrti's citation of the Lalitavistara
at PSPM §41. The Ābhidharmika's defence of traditional dependent-arising as free of
the faults of eternity and annihilation at PsP₁ 422.5-14 is rejected by Candrakīrti; for
Madhyamikas, the positing of the arising of real things entails both extremes (cf.
also, e.g., MMK XV.10-11 and corresponding PsP; MABhed 229.8-12; YSV on YS
43 and 44).
On interpretations of anekārtha and anānārtha found in Western scholarship, see
Tachikawa 1981. Tachikawa points to MMK XVIII.11 (anekārtham anānārtham
anucchedam aśāśvatam | etat tal lokanāthānāṁ buddhānām śāsanāmṛtam ||) and
XVIII.9 (aparapratyayam śāntam prapañcair aprapañcitam | nirvikalpam anā-
nārtham etat tattvasya lakṣaṇam ||) as substantiation for anekārtha and anānārtha of
the homage verses being intended by Nāgārjuna as bahuvrīhi compounds, and pro-
vides an explanation for the Tibetan and Chinese translations of anekārtha and anā-
nārtha as karmadhāraya compounds. Tachikawa, taking into consideration Candra-
kīrti's commentary on MMK XVIII.9 and 11 according to which ekārtha may be
taken to mean ekārthatva (“being one object”) and nānārtha anyārthatva (“being
different objects"), concludes that Candrakīrti's identification of one factor (ekārtha)
with the relation between two factors (ekārthatva) is also intended by Nāgārjuna in
the homage verse. Certainly, the refutation of two things standing in a relation of
dependence as being one thing or different/separate things is an important argument
of Nāgārjuna's that he utilizes on a number of occasions in the MMK (whether
Nāgārjuna would agree in each case with Candrakīrti’s interpretation of the relevant
kārikās is another question); see, e.g., MMK II.18-20, where the unacceptable conse-
quences of gamana and gantā posited as (numerically) one or other are set forth (cf.
Oetke's comments in Oetke 2001a: 78-79), and Nāgārjuna's conclusion couched in a
rhetorical question at MMK II.21: ekībhāvena vā siddhir nānābhāvena vā yayoḥ | na
vidyate tayoḥ siddhiḥ katham nu khalu vidyate ||; MMK VI.4 and 5 where the simul-
taneous arising of desire and the desirer, be the two one thing or two different things,
is shown to be impossible (cf. Oetke 2001a: 92-94); and MMK XXI.10 where sam-
bhava and vibhāva are asserted to be not logically possible as (numerically) one or
different. Canonical forerunners of such one/other arguments may be found at, e.g.,
SN II.61.75-76. Note also Prajñākaramati's apparent reliance at BCAP 421.5-7 on
concepts presented in the homage verses: ... ekānekasvabhāvaviviktam anutpannāni-
ruddham anucchedam aśāśvatam sarvaprapañcavinirmuktam ākāśapratisamam
dharmakāyākhyam paramārthatattvam ucyate.
The seeing of twelve-linked dependent-arising is stated in the Canon to free the
disciple of questions such as where he has come from and where he will go after46
TRANSLATION
The calming of manifoldness, [ultimate] welfare,
To him I pay homage.
And the Master [Nāgārjuna], seeing that just the Tathāgata alone,
owing to [his] understanding of dependent-arising as it has been
described, expounds the correct meaning, and having deemed the
discourse (pravāda) of all others to resemble the prattle (pralāpa) of
children, completely filled with faith, further qualifies the Exalted
One [as]:
[Homage verse 2d₂:]
the best of expounders (vadatām varam). 103
death (aham nu kho satto kuto āgato so kuhimgāmī bhavissatī ti; cf. SN II.26-27; MN
I.8 [ayam for aham]). Cp. the Śālistambasūtra on twelve-linked dependent-arising as
explaining rebirth quoted in PsP: pratyutpannam vā punar na pratisarati ... ayam
sattvaḥ kuta āgataḥ | sa itaś cyutaḥ kutra gamiṣyatīti (cited PsP₁ 593.11-594.1; cf.
Schoening 1995: 328, 735; cp. SN II.27) and tatra na kaścid dharmo’smāl lokāt
paralokam samkrāmate (cited PsP₁ 568.4; cf. Schoening 1995: 321, 729). The
Udanavarga's famous verse of its twenty-sixth chapter (nirvāṇavarga), viz., abhi-
jānāmy aham sthānam yatra bhūtam na vidyate | nākāśam na ca vijñānam na sūryaś
candramā na ca || (26.24), is followed by the verse naivāgatir na ca gatir nopapattiś
cyutir na ca | apratiṣṭham anālambam duḥkhāntaḥ sa nirucyate || (26.25); see
Bernhard 1965: 329. Reference to dharmas neither coming nor going occurs in
Prajñāpāramitā literature, but here the reason given is not, as it is in Conservative
Buddhism, that the dependent-arising of real factors explains the lack of an enduring
being or factors that would come or go, rather that things do not come or go because
they have not arisen, that is, do not exist; see, e.g., Așța 235.14-15: sarvadharmā
nāgacchanti na gacchanty ajānānā ajātā atyantājātita iti prajñāpāramitā anu-
gantavyā. The beginning of Aṣṭa chapter 31 teaches that the Tathāgatas neither come
nor go (e.g., tadyathāpi nāma kulaputra māyākāranirmitasya hastikāyasya vā
aśvakāyasya vā rathakāyasya vā pattikāyasya vā nāsty āgamanam vā gamanam vā,
evam eva kulaputra nāsti tathāgatānām āgamanam vā gamanam vā [Aṣṭa 253.26-
28]). In BCAP it is argued that real dharmas would be unchanging; there do not exist
dharmas with a real, that is, enduring, own-being that come from somewhere and
then, "ceasing," go to a “dharma reservoir”: nāpi sa utpadyamānaḥ satsvarūpeṇa
kutaścid agacchati nirudhyamāno vā kvacit samnicayam gacchati (354.13-15). Note
too Candrakīrti's reference to anāgamānirgamapratītyasamutpāda in his introduction
to the second chapter of MMK/PSP at PsP, 92.3-5. See additionally the explanations
of the eight qualifiers in ABh (ABhed 242.9ff.; ABhÅ 2ff.)
L
103 Bhāviveka delineates "expounders" (smra rnams) as śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas
and bodhisattvas, for they, inasmuch as they teach dependent-arising correctly, teach47
§18. And here the negation of cessation is first in order to show that a
determination of priority and posteriority is not established for arising
and cessation. 104 For he (= Nāgārjuna) will say:
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
If birth were earlier, old age and death later,
Birth would be without old age and death, and one who has not
died would be born.105
the path that facilitates attainment of the higher realms and liberation (cf. PP D 47b2;
P 56a4-5); he additionally includes comments on the words sambuddha, deśayāmāsa
and vara (see Kajiyama 1963: 44; Ames 1993: 217f.). At Buddhacarita 6.42, Prince
Siddhārtha, explaining his leave-taking to the grief-stricken Chandaka, is also called
vadatām varaḥ. This formulaic phrase is of course not limited to Buddhist literature;
Brockington has noted that the third most frequent phrase involving the words varaḥ
or śresthaḥ in the Mahābhārata is vadatām varaḥ (63 occurrences; 12 occurrences of
vadatām śreṣṭhaḥ), and that after rāmo dharmabṛtām varaḥ it is the second most
frequent one in the Rāmāyaṇa (9 occurrences; cf. Brockington 1998: 114 and 369f.)
ed
tr
104 Compare the statement here in the PSP with BPd 9.11-12: de gnyis la snga phyi’i
rnam par bzhag pa med pa de nyid rab tu bstan pa'i phyir. Justification for the order
of anirodha and anutpāda in the first homage verse is also found in the commentaries
by Buddhapalita and Bhāviveka. Buddhapālita devotes a long section to refuting the
opponent's objection that anutpāda should appear before anirodha in the verse,
citing, as Candrakīrti also does presumably in reliance on his commentary, MMK
XI.3; see BPed 6.2-9.13, BP 6-9. Bhāviveka responds to the PP opponent who
likewise argues that anutpāda should appear first with one of the arguments used
already by Buddhapalita: since samsāra has no beginning, cessation also precedes
arising (for his full response see PP D 48a1-2; P 56b6-8 and Kajiyama 1963: 45f.,
Ames 1993: 218-219). See also the various reasons given for the order of the two
words by the author of the ABh (ABhed 240.8-242.9.; ABh、 2f.). *LȚ glosses si-
ddhyabhāvam “non-existence of establishment” with kadācid utpādānantaram
nirodho nirodhāntaram (read: nirodhānantaram?) vā vināśaḥ; vināśa must be an
error (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 121, 131 [fol. 1b5]).
105 Candrakīrti cites MMK XI.3: pūrvam jātir yadi bhavej jarāmaraṇam uttaram |
nirjarāmaraṇā jātir bhavej jāyeta cāmṛtaḥ ||. In his commentary on MMK XI.3,
Candrakīrti argues, as Buddhapālita does in his comments on the order of anirodha
and anutpāda in the homage verses, first, that in samsāra the death of a being
precedes its birth; second, that trees (which the opponent argues are not preceded by
[their own] cessation) arise when there is the perishing of their respective seeds; and
third, that seed and tree are not different from each other, just as cause and effect are
not established as being different from each other (cp. BP ed 6.17-9.3). *LŢ: amṛta eva
sann utpadyeta pūrvam maraṇādyabhāvāt (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 121, 131 [fol. 1b5]).48
TRANSLATION
Therefore, there is not this restriction (niyama) that arising should be
earlier, cessation later.¹06
§19. Now, the Master [Nāgārjuna], wanting to explain dependent-
arising qualified by "without cessation," etc., [and] considering that
with the refutation of arising, the refutation of cessation and so forth
would be easy, right away undertakes the refutation of arising.
Having ascertained that the arising postulated by the opponents would
of course ¹07 (hi) be postulated as from self (svataḥ), from other
(parataḥ), from both (ubhayataḥ), or would be postulated as without
a cause (ahetutaḥ) 108—but is [in fact] in no way logically possible, he
says:
[MMK I.1:]
Not arisen from self, nor from other, nor from both or without a
cause
Do any things ever exist anywhere.10⁹
106 De La Vallée Poussin notes that PSP Tib has translated the equivalent of janma
pūrvam bhavati, jarāmaraṇam paścāt for pūrvam utpādena bhavitavyam paścān
nirodhena (PsP₁ 12, n. 4; Tib: skye ba ni snga bar gyur la | rga shi ni phyis so). It is
possible, given that both utpāda and jāti are translated as skye ba, that rga shi
represents an associative error. Slightly unusual is gyur for bhavitavyam, otherwise
translated here in PsP Tib accompanied by dgos (PsP Tib consistently translates
sentences containing the conjunction yat using relative-co-relative clauses).
107 This is the only translation possible for hi when it is construed with the iti
sentence. One wonders if it should instead be connected with the framing niścityāha
("For (hi), having ascertained that ... he says: ."); for comments on hi construed in
a similar way, see Schmithausen 2014, n. 1763. PsP Tib with skye ba yang does not
reflect utpado hi but rather utpādo 'pi, the api presumably understood as indicating a
subject change.
108
Compare the similar statement preceding MMK I.1 in PP: slob dpon gyis (P: gyi)
... skye ba med pa bstan nas 'gag pa med pa la sogs pa khyad par bstan sla bar
dgongs pa na skye ba med pa dang por bstan par bzhed nas | gzhan gyis yongs su
brtag pa’i skye ba rnam par rtog pa mngon sum du mdzad de (D: da) | 'di Itar skye
bar smra ba dag las kha cig ni dngos po rnams bdag las skye'o zhes zer | gzhan dag ni
gzhan las so zhes zer | kha cig ni gnyis las so zhes zer | gzhan dag ni rgyu med pa las
so zhes zer. (D 48b1-3; P 57b3-6).
109 MMK I.1: na svato napi parato na dvābhyām nāpy ahetutaḥ | utpannā jātu
vidyante bhāvāḥ kvacana kecana ||. Vetter considers the kārikā to be a sort of citation49
§20. In this context, “ever” (jātu) means “at any time" (kadācit). The
word "anywhere" (kvacana), referring to the location (ādhāra), is a
synonym for the word "any place" (kvacit). The word "any" (kecana),
referring to that which is located, is a synonym for "some" (kecit).
And therefore the [syntactical] connection is thus: "Definitely not
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
from the Nalakalāpīsutta (SN II.112-115)—a sutta in which the (ten) limbs of
dependent-arising are negated as having arisen from self, other, both self and other or
without a cause that has been extended to all things (cf. also La Vallée Poussin
1933: 11). Vetter (1982: 99) states, "Wer aber erwartet, dass Nāgārjuna nun auch wie
Sāriputta sagt: ‘und doch ist y durch x bedingt,' wird enttäuscht. Nicht nur dass eine
solche Bemerkung fehlt, es wird auch deutlich das Gegenteil gesagt und alles
Bedingtsein und Bedingungsein geleugnet, wie z.B. im Schlussvers des ersten
Kapitels." De La Vallée Poussin points to the four alternatives of DN III.137 applied
to the self and the world (cf. La Vallée Poussin 1910: 279, n. 1). Translations of the
kārikā into European languages are numerous and of unequal quality. Equally
plausible are those by Oetke (2001a: 36), who, in criticizing the Weber-Brosamer
and Back translation of the kārikā, suggests the two possibilities, "Weder aus sich
selbst noch aus anderem noch aus beidem (d.h. sowohl aus sich als auch aus
anderem) und auch nicht ohne Ursache entstandene irgendwelche Dinge finden sich
jemals (jātu) irgendwo” and “Nirgendwo finden sich jemals (jātu) irgendwelche
Dinge, seien sie aus sich selbst oder aus anderem oder aus beidem (d.h. sowohl aus
sich als auch aus anderem) oder ohne [irgend]eine Ursache entstanden” and that by
Vetter (1982: 99), who translates, “Es gibt niemals [und] nirgendwo irgendwelche
Dinge, die aus sich selbst entstanden sind oder aus anderem oder aus beiden oder
ohne Ursache,” as well as that by Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 17): “Never anywhere do any
entities (bhāva = dnos po) exist (vidyante = yod pa) originated from self [i.e.
themselves], nor from an other, nor from the two, nor from no cause." Less precise,
for example, is that by Streng (1967: 183), who translates, “Never are any existing
things found to originate from ...", thereby omitting an equivalent for kvacana and
adding the non-mirrored qualifier “existing” which suggests that “existing things”
originate in some fifth way. Siderits and Katsura (2013: 18) translate kvacana as “in
any way." Garfield (1995: 105) appears to translate nam yang (jātu) as “whatever":
"... Does anything whatever, anywhere arise" (the same translation for nam yang
appears in Samten and Garfield 2006: 61). Garfield's (1995: 105-107) view of the
intention of the kārikā as expressed in his own commentary is, in the light of
Madhyamaka thought, problematic. I translate as I do in order to accommodate
Candrakīrti's comments.
Candrakīrti cites the kārikā in his commentary on MA VI.7 (MABhed 81.7-8; MABhr
1910: 279); cf. also Lamotte 1966: 326 and 1970: 1638; PsP₁ 12, n. 6. Cp. MMK
XXI.13: na svato jāyate bhāvaḥ parato naiva jāyate | na svataḥ parataś caiva jāyate
jayate kutah.50
TRANSLATION
110
(naiva)¹¹0 arisen from self do any things ever exist anywhere." The
[remaining] triad of propositions (pratijñā) ["from other," "from
both" and "without a cause"] is to be connected in that same manner.
§21. [Objection:] But when the restrictive determination “definitely
not arisen from self" (naiva svata utpannāḥ) is made, doesn't the
undesired [implication] "arisen from other" (parata utpannāḥ)
obtain? [Response: No,] it does not obtain since a non-presuppos-
itional negation (prasajyapratiṣedha) is intended [not a presuppos-
110 PSP Tib lacks an equivalent for eva here, but the restrictive particle is mirrored in
the following nanu ca sentence (gal te bdag las skye ba ma yin pa nyid do zhes bya ba
...).
111 The same words of MMK I.1 are glossed in MABh on MA VI.7, where kvacana
(gang na yang) and kecana (gang dag) have been explained somewhat more
extensively: the scope of kvacana is extended to place, time and tenet systems, while
kecana is said to refer to internal and external things: nam yang zhes bya ba ni gzhar
yang zhes bya ba'i don to || gang na yang zhes bya ba'i sgra 'gar yang gi sgra’i rnam
grangs rten gyi tshig gis ni yul dang dus dang grub pa'i mtha' bshad do || gang dag gi
sgra rten (MABhun: brten) pa’i tshig ni phyi dang nang gi dngos po brjod pa'o || des
na phyi (MABhun: phyi dang) nang gi dngos po rnams ni yul dang dus dang grub pa'i
mtha' 'gar yang bdag las skye ba srid pa ma yin no zhes 'di ltar sbyar bar bya’o ||
(MABhed 81.9-15). Candrakīrti, in his commentary on MMK XXV.5cd (nāsamskṛto
vidyate hi bhāvaḥ kvacana kaścana ), glosses: kvacanety adhikaraṇe deśe kāle
siddhānte vā| kaścanety adheya ādhyātmiko bāhyo vety arthaḥ (PSP₁ 526.6-7:
kaścanety adheye ādhyātmiko bāhyātmiko vety arthaḥ; ms P, like ms D [see de Jong
1978: 245] attests bāhyo, not bāhyātmiko as found in de La Vallée Poussin's edition
and in PsP Tib [ms P: ... ādheye | ādhyātmiko ...]). Bhāviveka had already in his PP
explained kvacana as referring to tenet systems; he specifies kecana as defiled and
pure things: gang dag ces bya ba ni kun nas nyon mongs pa dang | rnam par byang
ba'i dngos po dag go | gang na yang zhes bya ba (P: bas) ni rang gi mdzad pa’i mtha’
dang so so'i rgyud grub pa dag na yang ngo | nam yang zhes bya ba ni lan 'ga' yang
ngo || (D 53a7-53b1; P 64a8-64b1; cf. Kajiyama 1963: 62; Ames 1993: 234). The
author of the ABh does not mention tenet systems in his gloss of kvacana, but like
Candrakīrti in the MABh and PsP chapter 25, specifies it as referring to time and
place; kecana is glossed as "any things" (dngos po 'ga' yang), and bhāva (dngos po)
as dharmas; he notes that one should connect the word bhāva with "common to all
the non-Buddhists" (dngos po zhes bya ba ni | chos rnams te dngos po zhes bya baʼi
sgra ni 'di mu stegs can thams cad dang thun mong ngo zhes bya bar sbyar; he
glosses all the words and phrases of the kārikā; see ABhed 251.10-22; ABh 9).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
51
itional negation (paryudāsa)],¹¹² because arising from other is going
to be refuted as well.113 And the reasoning by which arising from self
112 PSP Tib presents two separate reasons conjoined with dang: ... brjod par ’dod pa’i
phyir dang | gzhan las skye ba yang 'gog par 'gyur ba’i phyir ro ||.
113 On prasajyapratiṣedha and paryudāsa, see, e.g., Kajiyama 1973 (for references,
see p. 162, n. 1) and Kajiyama 1998: 38, n. 62; Seyfort Ruegg 1981: 37-38, 65 and n.
94, Seyfort Ruegg 2000: 255f., and Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 19-24 (n. 6). Candrakīrti
denies that the negation applied to svata utpannā (bhāvā vidyante) implies that there
exist things that have arisen in some other way, i.e., from other; the negation does not
suggest another proposition, in the way, for example, that the presuppositional
negation "Fat Devadatta does not eat during the day” implies his eating by night.
Bhāviveka appears to have been the first to have introduced reference to the two
types of negation into the Madhyamaka discussion, specifically with regard to the
statement na svata utpannā (bhāvā vidyante) (see D 48b6-49a2, D lacks gzhan las
skye'o zhes bya bar nges par 'gyur ba dang | de bzhin du bdag kho na las skye ba med
de 'o na ci zhe na; P 58a3-58b1; Kajiyama 1963: 48 and 1973: 168-9; Ames 1993:
221). As Kajiyama (1973: 170-172) has pointed out, while later Buddhist scholars (in
league with the Grammarians, etc.) assert that a negation construed with a nominal
expresses a presuppositional negation, and one construed with a verb a non-
presuppositional negation, Bhāviveka asserts that the statement na svata utpannā
bhāvā vidyante can be made explicit as a non-presuppositional negation through
restriction by way of the particle eva. To achieve the meaning he considers is
intended, namely, "It is not the case that things arisen from self exist," he construes
the restrictive particle eva (and the negation na) with the verb/predicate: 'dir dngos
po rnams bdag las skye ba med pa kho na’o zhes nges par bzung bar bya’o || (D 49a1;
P 58a7); Kajiyama (1973: 169) reconstructs *bhāvāḥ svata utpannā naiva vidyante.
eva placed elsewhere in the sentence, as, e.g., in naiva svata utpannā bhāvā vidyante,
would cause the sentence to yield the meaning "Things arisen from self do not exist,”
and to thereby imply that things arisen from others exist. Further, when eva restricts
only svata, the sentence svata eva utpannā bhāvā na vidyante, “Things arisen from
self alone do not exist,” would imply that things arisen from self and other exist (cf.
Kajiyama 1973: 168f.). Although he does not mention types of negation by name, in
the MABh Candrakīrti states (one assumes also with the intent to defend Nāgārjuna's
placement of the negative particle) that the negation ought to be construed with svata
utpannāḥ and not with the verb vidyante because it will be evident that total non-
existence is meant: 'dir ma yin zhes bya ba 'di yod pa nyid kyi sgrub byed rang las
skye ba dang sbrel gyi yod pa dang ni ma yin te | de dgag pa don gyis grub pa'i phyir
ro || (MABhed 81.15-17): “Here [in the first kārikā] this negation (ma yin; *nañ, *na)
is to be construed with ‘arisen from self' (svata utpannāḥ), (i.e., self as) the
establisher of existence (yod pa nyid kyi sgrub byed) [- would there be any real
existence -] but not with [the verb] ‘exist' (vidyante), because the negation of that
[existence] is established as a matter of course (*arthāt)." De La Valleé Poussin
(MABh 1910: 279) translates more freely, in accord with the sense given in the PSP:52
is impossible¹¹4 should be determined by way of [statements] such
as,
115
TRANSLATION
For there is not any advantage in the coming into existence of
something from itself,
and the origination once again of what has [already] originated is
simply not reasonable. 116
"Quant à la négation (na vidyante), il est faux que, [ne] portant [que] sur la naissance
de soi, elle ait une valeur affirmative [c'est-à-dire comporte le corollaire: “Les êtres
naissent d'autrui"], car elle est acquise dans un sens purement négatif."
114 *LȚ's author determines that the correlative pronoun să in the construction yayā
copapattyā svata utpādo na sambhavati sā relates to upapatti. He then adds: parato
['lpy utpade avaseyety (ms: avasety) abhisambandhaḥ. He appears to think that what
is meant by Candrakīrti is either that the reasoning proving that arising from self is
impossible extends to prove that arising from other is impossible, or, and much more
loosely, that a reasoning which proves that arising from other is impossible also
needs to be determined. Cp. Yonezawa 2004: 121 [fol. 1b5]: parato py utpāde ava ety
...; ibid., 131: parato 'py utpāde tāvat sā ity abhisambandhaḥ.
115 Ms Q refers to the Madhyamakāvatāra as the source text, as do all of the paper
manuscripts and PsP Tib. The MA reference in ms Q, however, appears only in its
lower margin, (madhyakāvatārādidvāreṇā [sic]), marked to be inserted within the
main text between the akṣaras nā of ityādinā and va of avaseyā. Ms P, the only
manuscript not affected by readings from the y line (see Stemma), lacks the MA
reference; its absence from P is difficult to explain on paleographical grounds and
points to its not having been in ms ß. Its presence in Q and the paper manuscripts
must be the result of contamination from the y line (note Q's further interpolated
references to the MA at the end of both PSPM $61 and §104). That ms Q's reference
is in its margin suggests that its source is ms 0. Candrakīrti would have presumed his
readers' familiarity with his MA; the reference was probably originally added as
marginalia intended for readers/students unfamiliar with the citation. The conclusion
that the reference found in Q and the paper manuscripts is an accretion is supported
by the fact that *LȚ's author deems it necessary to explain ityādinā with madhyama-
kāvatāragranthena (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 121, 131 [fol. 1b5]). PsP Tib's la sogs pas
dbu ma la 'jug pa la sogs pa'i sgo nas nges par bya'o merely indicates that the
reference had already been incorporated into the text of at least one of the
manuscripts used by the translators. For further remarks regarding this and other
accretions in ms Q, see infra Manuscript Relationships. A preliminary evaluation of
this reference appeared in MacDonald 2008: 25ff.
116 MA VI.8cd: tasmad dhi tasya bhavane na guṇo 'sti kaścij jātasya janma punar eva
ca naiva yuktam ||. MA VI.8d is cited again at PsP₁ 79.11 (see PSPM §129). MA VI.8c
Tib reads de ni de las 'byung na yon tan 'ga' yang yod ma yin ||, while PSP Tib reads
de las de ni ’byung na yon tan 'ga' yang yod ma yin ||. The MABh, as would bePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
53
§22. The Master Buddhapalita, for his part (tu), states,
Things do not arise from self because their arising would be
pointless (tadutpädavaiyarthyāt) and because there would be the
fault of over-extension (atiprasangadoṣāt).1¹17 For there is no
expected, reflects the structure of MA VI.8c: de ni zhes bya ba ni .... (MABhd 82.8).
Candrakīrti exemplifies in the MABh the meaning of tasmād dhi tasya bhavane with
myu gu'i rang gi bdag nyid de nyid las myu gu’i bdag nyid de nyid 'byung ba. The
*LŢ glosses tasmāt with svabhāvāt tasya (ms: asya) svabhāvasya (ms: svabhāvamya)
na (ms: ra) guṇa iti vidyamānatvāt (cp. Yonezawa 2004: 121, 131 [fol. 1b5]) "from
this, [i.e.,] from own-being; of this [i.e.,] of own-being; there is no advantage'
because [the own-being already] exists."
117 The second fault stated by Buddhapālita is presented in BP as skye ba thug pa med
par 'gyur ba'i phyir (BPed 10.13-14; de La Vallée Poussin reconstructs as janmāna-
vasthānāt [PSP₁ 14, n. 1]) “because there would be a succession without end of
arising." PsP Skt, in contrast, reads atiprasangadoṣāt. The PsP Tib translators
inserted the BP Tib quotation—which they have taken from either BP Tib or PP Tib
(the citation is identical in both)—after making minor alterations to it, one of them
being the change from skye ba thug pa med par 'gyur ba'i phyir to shin tu thal bar
'gyur ba'i phyir, a change that permits PsP Tib to better reflect PsP Skt's
atiprasangadoṣāt (doṣa has not been translated). Note that Candrakīrti makes
reference to anavasthā in his defence of this statement of Buddhapālita’s against
Bhāviveka's critique. He also makes reference to aniṣṭhā, which could alternatively
suggest that the reading in BP was *janmāniṣṭhāyāḥ, or perhaps more probable,
*janmāniṣṭhāpatteḥ. Whatever the original reading was, it appears that Candrakīrti,
as in the other cases noted for the first chapter, is responsible for the change in
wording. Of course, it not impossible that Jñanagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan, the
translators of BP and PP, also read atiprasangadoṣāt and decided to spell out the
fault; Buddhapālita's explanation atha sann api jāyeta na kadācin na jāyeta, how-
ever, would seem to nicely explain *janmānavasthānāt/janmāniṣṭhāpatteḥ. One
might want to consider the possibility that BP attested *aniṣṭhāprasaṁgadoṣāt and
that the BP manuscript(s) Candrakīrti had access to contained the corrupt reading
atiprasangadoṣāt, but it is difficult to imagine why the BP translators would have
rendered *aniṣṭhāprasangadoṣāt as skye ba thug pa med par 'gyur ba’i phyir. Com-
pare the instance later on in the first chapter of PsP (PSPM §95 end) where PsP Skt's
"fault of a succession without end" (aniṣṭhādoṣa) is translated with thug pa med pa'i
skyon (de La Vallée Poussin has wrongly emended to anavasthādoṣa [PSP₁ 61.8-9]).
See also PSP₁ 210.16 where PsP Tib translates aniṣṭhādoṣaprasangāt as thug pa med
par thal ba’i phyir (de La Vallée Poussin reads anistadoṣaprasangāt; mss P and D
read aniṣṭhādosaprasangāt) and CŚTed 228.16 (CŚT Tib 229.25-26) where
aniṣṭhāprasangāt is translated as thug pa med par thal ba’i phyir (see 228, n. 13
where the text's reading aniṣṭaprasangāt is corrected to aniṣṭhāprasangāt).
The "over-extension" referred to by the technical term atiprasanga consists, as
explained in the text, in the fact that the existing thing will never stop arising. The
L54
TRANSLATION
purpose in the re-arising of things [already] existing by [their]
own nature; but if [a thing], though [already] existing, would
arise [again], it would never not arise.¹18
119
§23. In regard to this [statement of Buddhapālita's], some¹¹ [i.e.,
Bhāviveka] criticize:
That [mode of argumentation] is not suitable, because a reason
(hetu) and an example (dṛṣṭānta) have not been stated ¹20 and ¹21
translation of atiprasanga as "absurd" is defended in Franco 1984: 137, n. 33.
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 25) overlooks that api in the sentence explaining the ati-
prasanga is intended in a concessive sense and thus translates it as "also": "But (ii) if
(atha = ci ste) the existent also were [once] to be [re]born, never would it not be
[re]born."
Cp. the PSP citation to ŚS kārikā 6 (ŚSVed 240; refutation of a cause): yang na de'i
rgyus dgos pa yod do zhe na | de Ita na yang de ni yod pa ma yin te | skyes pa slar
yang mi skye bas thug pa med pa'i skyon dang | skye ba don med pa’i phyir ro.; śSV ed
234 (refutation of svabhāva): skye ba don med pa dang | thug pa med pa’i skyon ...;
CŚȚ D 58b4-5; 175a2-3. See also PsP₁ 14, n. 3; Yotsuya 1999: 75.
118 Candrakīrti is citing from BP, which reads in translation: de la re zhig dngos po
rnams bdag gi bdag nyid las skye ba med de | de dag gi skye ba don med pa nyid du
'gyur ba'i phyir dang | skye ba thug pa med par 'gyur ba'i phyir ro || 'di ltar dngos po
bdag gi bdag nyid du yod pa rnams la yang skye ba dgos pa med do || gal te yod kyang
yang skye na nam yang mi skye bar mi 'gyur bas de yang mi 'dod de de'i phyir re
zhig dngos po rnams bdag las skye ba med do || (BPed 10.11-17).
PP: 'di las gzhan ni dngos po rnams bdag gi bdag nyid las skye ba med de de dag gi
skye ba don med pa nyid du 'gyur ba'i phyir dang | skye ba thug pa med par 'gyur
ba'i phyir ro | (D without ) zhes rnam par bshad pa byed do || (D 49a5-7; P 59a7-8).
Avalokitavrata states that 'di las gzhan ("the [MMK commentator] different from
this [MMK commentator Bhāviveka]") is one of the group of MMK commentators.
He lists as MMK commentators Nāgārjuna, Buddhapālita, Candrakīrti, Devaśarman,
Guṇaśrī, Guṇamati, Sthiramati and Bhāviveka; he identifies the author of the citation
as Buddhapalita (cf. PPT D 73a4-6; P 85a7-85b1).
=
119 LVP: "eke
Bhāvaviveka-ādayaḥ” (PsP₁ 14, n. 4). *LȚ's author identifies eke as
Bhāviveka: atraika iti Bhāvivekaḥ (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 121, 131 [fol. 1b5-6]).
120 Yotsuya (1999: 76, n. 10) states, “In pointing out that entities do not originate
from self, Buddhapālita presents the grounds: pointlessness (don med pa, vaiyarthya)
and infinite regress (thug pa med pa, anavasthā) ... . These are, however, not con-
sidered to be logical reasons, since they are not properties of the subject, i.e. entities.
In other words, '‘pakṣadharmatā', which is one of the characteristics of a correct
logical reason ... is not established" (more precisely, the grounds of the consequence
are "pointlessness of arising” and “a succession without end of arising"). Cf. PS55
because the faults pronounced by the [Sankhya] opponents have
not been refuted.122 And because it is a statement of [unwanted]
consequence (prasangavākya),123 [it follows,] in view of [the fact
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
III.17, where Dignāga states that the reason in a consequence is not a property of the
subject. The PS III.17 reconstruction published in Katsura 2009: 158 (prasango
'pakṣadharmatvāt pūrvatropagame sati | hetupratijñayos teṣām doṣoktyā dūṣaṇam
gatam || [the words in Roman have been reconstructed from the Tibetan]) has been
revised by the team working on PSȚ III to: prasango 'pakṣadharmatvād anyo hetu-
pratijñayoḥ doṣoktyā dūṣaṇam jñatam pūrvatropagame sati ||. I am grateful to Prof.
Katsura for providing me with the revised reconstruction. De La Vallée Poussin (cf.
PSP₁ 23, n. 2) cites the Nyāyavārttikatātparyāṭīkā: prasango hi na sādhanam, hetor
abhāvāt.
121
None of the PSP manuscripts attest a ca at this point, but PsP Tib, PP (moreso PP
Peking than Derge), and PPT appear to confirm that one was included in the original
Skt of PP and PsP. For details, see Appendix VII.
122
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 26) interprets the first reason as the ground for the second,
but does not provide an explanation for his interpretation. He translates, “That
[argument of Buddhapālita's] is unfounded. This is so (i) because, on the one hand,
no inferential reason (gtan tshigs) and no instance (dpe) having been provided, no
rebuttal has been provided (aparihāra = ma bsal ba) [by Buddhapalita] of the faults
(doṣa = ñes pa) alleged by the opponent [viz. the Sāmkhya]."
123 William Ames (1993: 244, n. 102) states that the appearance of glags yod pa'i
tshig (*sāvakāśavacana) in the PP instead of thal bar 'gyur ba'i tshig (prasanga-
vākya) "does not necessarily mean that the translators had a different Sanskrit text.
They may have translated prasanga-vākya in this way because of the context and
because of Avalokitavrata's subcommentary. Avalokitavrata glosses glags yod pa’i
tshig as rgol ba gzhan gyi klan ka'i glags yod pa'i tshig, ‘a statement affording an
opportunity for censure by an opponent (Ava P 86a-8, D 74a-2).”” I am inclined,
against this, to think that the PP translators did read sāvakāśavacana in their
manuscript(s) and thus translated literally, and that it was Candrakīrti who re-worded
sāvakāśavacana here and on other occasions as prasangavākya. His usage of sāvakā-
savacana in the later question kuto nu khalv ... ācāryabuddhapālitasya sāvakāśa-
vacanābhidhāyitvam (see PSPM §35; PSP₁ 24.1-2) is otherwise unexpected and
unusual, especially because it is precisely with this sentence that he directly refers to
the third fault mentioned by Bhāviveka. Note that when Candrakīrti finishes his
argumentation against specific faults and then refers back to them, he tends to
formulate his rejection of the fault as a question, e.g., tat kim ucyate tad ayuktam
hetudṛṣṭāntānabhidhānād iti; kutaḥ siddhasādhanapakṣadoṣāśankā kuto vā hetor vi-
ruddhārthatāśanketi; kuto nu khalu ācāryabuddhapālitasya sāvakāśavacanābhi-
dhāyitvam; the aberrant translation de'i phyir kho bo cag la grub pa'i mtha' dang 'gal
ba ga la yod for tataś ca siddhāntavirodhāsambhavaḥ in the reasoning concluded by
kuto nu khalu ... can possibly be explained as the result of the PsP translators having
noticed this tendency and having decided to present this conclusion as well as a56
TRANSLATION
that] through the reversal of the meaning [of the statement] under
discussion the opposite of the probandum (sādhya) and of its
properties (taddharma) [i.e., the probans] are expressed, that
there would be contradiction with [your own] accepted tenets
(kṛtāntavirodha), [because the resulting inference states that]
"Things have arisen from other, because arising is purposeful
and because arising stops [upon completion of the process of
arising]."124
question. I think it more likely that with kuto nu khalu ... ācāryabuddhapālitasya
sāvakāśavacanābhidhāyitvam Candrakīrti intentionally foregoes his earlier re-
wording and employs exactly Bhāviveka's terminology for the sake of having used it
at least once and for the stylistic punch it delivers.
124 Candrakīrti is citing from Bhāviveka's PP which reads in its Tibetan translation:
de ni rigs pa ma yin te | gtan tshigs dang dpe ma brjod pa'i phyir dang | gzhan gyis
smras pa'i nyes pa ma bsal ba'i phyir ro || (D: phyir dang ) glags yod pa’i tshig¹ yin
pa'i phyir te ² skabs kyi don las bzlog pas bsgrub (P: sgrub) par bya ba dang | de'i
chos bzlog pa'i don mngon pas dngos po rnams gzhan las skye bar 'gyur ba dang |
skye ba 'bras bu dang bcas pa nyid du 'gyur ba dang | skye ba thug pa yod par 'gyur
baʼ’i phyir mdzad pa’i mtha³³ dang 'gal bar 'gyur ro || (D 49a6-49b1; P 58b8-59a2).
PsP Tib: ¹thal bar 'gyur ba'i tshig for glags yod pa’i tshig; ²without te |; ³grub pa'i
mtha' for mdzad pa'i mtha' (translated in Ames 1993: 222f., Kajiyama 1963: 50,
Yotsuya 1999: 76). On de La Vallée Poussin's remark that janmanirodhāt does not
correspond to PsP's (and PP's) skye ba thug pa ... (PsP₁ 14, n. 4), see Hopkins 1983:
817, n. 363.
The third point of criticism has received attention from both modern and Tibetan
scholars; see, e.g., Hopkins 1983: 491; Seyfort Ruegg 1991: 290-292, Seyfort Ruegg
2000: 252-257 (= the 1991 section with minor changes) and Tillemans 1992. The
reversal (viparyaya) that Bhāviveka refers to results in the probandum of the
prasanga "[things] do not arise from self" changing to the inference's “[things] have
arisen from other" and the first probans "because their arising would be pointless"
changing to “because their arising is purposeful" and the second probans “because
there would be a succession without end of arising" (or, as Candrakīrti presents it:
"because there would be the fault of over-extension") changing to “because arising
stops." The logical mechanism behind the process of reversal has been under dispute.
According to Seyfort Ruegg (1991: n. 35; 2000: 255, n. 35), a contraposition of terms
in the Dharmakīrtian sense of prasangaviparyaya is not intended and was "to be
raised in connexion with Bhavya's and Candrakīrti's passage dealing with prakṛ-
tārthaviparyaya and prasangaviparītārtha only in later discussions of the logical
question it poses ..."; he (2000: 253; see also 1991: 291) writes, “As for Bhavya's
objection to Buddhapālita's prasanga-statement, it apparently involves the idea not
of contraposition but of implicative reversal, namely that a negation of productionPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
57
from self would imply the affirmation of production from an other." See Tillemans
1992 for a presentation of dGe lugs pa interpretations of the prasangaviparyaya.
It seems, however, that a form of technical prasangaviparyaya is intended. Probably
the most promising attempt to date to shed light on Bhāviveka's understanding of
both the prasanga and its viparyaya is that by Toshikazu Watanabe (cf. Watanabe
2013), who examines Dignāga's explanation, criticism and (re)interpretation of
Sankhya vīta and āvīta reasoning, and considers its influence on Bhāviveka in the
context of Bhāviveka's criticism of Buddhapalita's prasanga against the possibility
of arising from other, as presented in the PSP (see PSPM §63; Watanabe's explanation
is applicable also in the present case of the criticism of Buddhapālita's prasanga
against arising from self). When employed by the Sankhyas, vīta and āvīta are
always used in conjunction with each other, with the vīta argument directly proving
an object / state of affairs and the āvīta argument, always formulated as prasanga
that is introduced after the main vīta reasoning, included as support for the
conclusion drawn by the vīta. As Watanabe explains, Dignāga argues in PS III.16
that āvīta reasoning is actually not different from its corresponding vīta reasoning
(which he endows with a reason that meets the three requirements of a proper logical
reason), because both have the same pervasion (vyāpti); that is, their pervasions are
logically equivalent. āvīta, according to Dignāga, can thus be reformulated into vīta
to form a proper logical proof (sādhana). Watanabe (ibid., 1232f.) adverts to the fact
that the structure of Dharmakīrti's prasanga and prasangaviparyaya corresponds to
that of the āvīta and vīta accepted by Dignāga, noting that Jinendrabuddhi “explains
the reformulation of āvīta reasoning into vīta reasoning in the PS(V) by using the
term 'prasangaviparyaya.” Working under the assumption that Bhāviveka is relying
on Dignāga's interpretation of āvīta reasoning when he criticizes Buddhapālita’s
prasanga statements, Watanabe demonstrates that Bhāviveka's reversal of the
prasanga closely resembles Dignāga's transformation of āvīta reasoning into vīta. In
reliance on Watanabe's conclusions for the case of Bhāviveka's reversal of the pra-
sanga against arising from other, we can propose that in the present case, following
the structure of Dignāga's āvīta (cf. <Āvīta-D 1> and <Āvīta-D 2> in ibid., 1230f.),
that the prasanga-leaving aside for now Buddhapalita's second reason and
focussing only on utpādavaiyarthya-can be seen as having the structure "bhāvāḥ
(svata utpadyate utpādavaiyarthya). Thus svata utpadyate → utpādavaiyarthya
represents the contraposition, i.e., the negative concomitance (vyatirekavyāpti), of the
positive concomitance (anvayavyāpti) of the inference "Things have arisen from
other because arising is purposeful," this latter vyāpti being janmasāphalya → parata
utpadyate.
"
On prasanga and prasangaviparyaya in the Dharmakīrtian tradition, see, e.g., Iwata
1993; Kajiyama 1998: 114ff.; see also discussions regarding Tsong kha pa's
interpretation of the reversal in Seyfort Ruegg 1991: 292ff., Seyfort Ruegg 2000:
257ff., Hopkins 1983: 490-492; Tillemans 1992: 318ff.
PsP Tib mirrors PP Tib in separating out and listing the reversed sādhya and
sādhanas that, according to Bhāviveka, are implied in Buddhapālita’s original
statement instead of, as PsP Skt does, merely presenting the unitary positive58
TRANSLATION
§24. We¹25 regard this entire critique as totally inappropriate. Why?
That which is alleged first in it, namely, “because a reason and an
example have not been stated," is inapplicable. For what reason?
Because [with Buddhapalita's statement] the [Sānkhya] opponent
maintaining arising from self is questioned as to the purpose of the
M
counterpart to Buddhapālita’s statement interpreted as a paryudāsa: parasmād
utpannā bhāvā janmasāphalyāj janmanirodhāc ceti (PsP Tib:) dngos po rnams
gzhan las skye bar 'gyur ba dang | skye ba 'bras bu dang bcas pa nyid du 'gyur ba
dang skye ba thug pa yod par 'gyur ba'i phyir. In two other passages in which
Bhāviveka criticizes Buddhapālita's prasangas in a similar way, namely, his
criticisms of Buddhapālita's prasanga refuting arising from other and that refuting
arising from no cause, PsP Tib and PP Tib likewise only provide a serial layout of
the reversed limbs of the prasangas without construing them as a unified statement:
for the former prasanga, the reversal is presented in PsP Skt (PSPM §63) as svata
ubhayato 'hetuto votpadyante bhāvāḥ kutaścit kasyacid utpatteḥ, but appears in PsP
Tib as: des na de la thal bar 'gyur ba’i ngag yin pa'i phyir bsgrub par bya ba dang
sgrub par byed pa bzlog par byas na | dngos po rnams bdag gam gnyis sam rgyu med
pa las skye bar 'gyur ba dang | 'ga' zhig las 'ga' zhig skye bar 'gyur ba’i phyir ... (cf.
PP D 50a6; P 60a6-8); for the latter prasanga, PsP Skt (PSP₁ §67) presents the
reversal as hetuta utpadyante bhāvāḥ kadācit kutaścid utpatteḥ ārambhasāphalyāc ca,
but PSP Tib reads: gal te bsgrub par bya ba dang sgrub par byed pa bzlog pa gsal ba
ngag gi don du mngon par 'dod na | de’i tshe 'di skad du | dngos po rnams rgyu las
skye bar 'gyur ba dang | lan 'ga' kha cig las kha cig skye bar 'gyur ba dang | rtsom pa
'bras bu dang bcas pa nyid du 'gyur ba'i phyir ro || (cp. PP D 53a5-6; P 64a5-7; cp.
also Bhāviveka's reversals in his critique of another prasanga statement of Buddha-
palita's in his commentary on MMK I.9cd [PP D 60b5; P 72b7-8]). The same mode
of presentation is found in the corresponding sections of the PPT (like the PP, trans-
lated by Jñanagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan). Such passages show quite clearly that
the PSP translators had at their disposal a translation of the PP to which they referred
and from which they appropriated passages cited in PsP Skt. The translation bdag gi
bdag nyid for svātmanā in the PSP citation from Buddhapālita's commen-
tary instead of PsP Tib's more usual rang gi bdag nyid-suggests that they also had
a translation of BP at hand. That they must have had access to a substantial number
of translated works becomes apparent from the fact that the majority of the other
quotations in PSP Tib have been copied in from their respective source-text Tibetan
translations. On Pa tshab and his method for dealing with citations, see MacDonald
2015.
125 *LT: vayam iti Candrakīrtiḥ. *LȚ's author states immediately before this
clarification that Bhāviveka is a proponent of independent proofs: bhāvivekaḥ kila
svatantrasā[dha]navādī (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 121, 131 [fol. 1b6]).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
re-arising of something [already] existing: 126 [When you say] "from
self" (svataḥ), you assert something [already] existing to be the cause
(hetutvena) and [consider that] it is exactly that which arises; but we
do not see [any] purpose in the arising again of something [already]
existing, and we see ¹27 [in this claim of the arising of things already
existing] an infinite succession (anavasthā).¹28 And you do not assent
to the arising again of what has arisen, or to a succession without end
(aniṣṭhā). Therefore, your assertion [that things arise from self] is
simply illogical (nirupapattika), and is contradicted by what [you
your]self [otherwise] maintain (svābhyupagamaviruddha).
59
§25. [Is it reasonable to assume,] when [he has been] censured to such
an extent (iyati codite),¹²⁹ that the [sensible] opponent does not accept
129
126 PSP Tib lacks an equivalent for vidyamānasya punarutpāde prayojanam. It may
have been dropped by the translators because pha rol po bdag las skye bar 'dod pa la
'dri bar byed pa yin (= paraḥ svata utpattim abhyupagacchan pṛcchyate) has for the
sake of the Tibetan syntax been placed not before the argumentation beginning with
svata iti vidyamānam hetutvena bravīși, but after the final conclusion tasmān niru-
papattika eva tava vādaḥ svābhyupagamaviruddhaś ca. They may have considered
that this placement of pha rol po bdag las skye bar 'dod pa la 'dri bar byed pa yin
made vidyamānasya punarutpāde prayojanam irrelevant, or misleading, since a lack
of purpose relates only to the first part of the argumentation in the Sanskrit, and
represents only one of the consequences of arising from self, the second having been
stated in the Tibetan before pha rol po bdag las skye bar 'dod pa la ’dri bar byed pa
yin appears. The restructuring of the passage is not completely satisfactory, though,
because it presents the opponent as being directly asked the argumentation (... zhes
pha rol po 'dri bar byed pa yin), whereas in the Sanskrit the opponent is
"questioned" in regard to the purpose of re-arising, that is, is challenged with its con-
sequences.
127
Hopkins (1983: 474) translates "and we also see ...", taking into consideration PSP
Tib's added yang (... dgos pa ma mthong zhing thug pa med par yang mthong ...).
128
Cp. Candrakīrti on CŚ XI.10: yadi hi tasyāstitvaṇ syāt tadā sato vidyamānasya
punar api janma syāt [] na ca sataḥ punar api janma nyāyyam niḥprayojanatvāt [|]
aniṣṭhāprasangad ā samsāram ekasyaivārthasya punar utpādenāparisamāptodayasya
satas tatpadārthāntarāpravṛtter hetuphalabhāvavyāghātaḥ syāt [] (CŚTed 228.14-18;
see also CŚTed 228, n. 13).
129 Yotsuya's conjecture iyati (1999: 57) is now confirmed by iyati of mss P and Q.
Although the subject of the locative absolute iyati codite is actually iyat, for the sake
of the English I translate as above. De La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 15, n. 8) based his
conjecture tanmātreṇa on PsP Tib's 'di dag tsam zhig gis. PsP Tib's 'di dag appears60
TRANSLATION
(i.e., that he rejects) [our criticism], so that the employment of a
reason and example might [then in fact] be useful (sāphalya)?¹³⁰ [No,
to be the translators' specification of exactly what "to such an extent” (iyat) refers
back to, namely, either the two consequences utpādavaiyarthyāt and *janmāni-
sthāpatteḥ stated by Buddhapālita, or the nirupapattika(tva) and svābhyupagama-
viruddha(tva) implied by the consequences. The fact that svābhyupagamavirodha is
referred to in the following sentence may indicate that the translators meant the latter
pair.
130
I understand kim's scope to be the entire sentence, and the question as a rhetorical
one. Yotsuya (1999: 56) has also understood the sentence this way, but his translation
is not unambiguous. He translates, “When [the opponent (= the Sāmkhya)] is
censured to such an extent, why [should] the opponent not accept [our censure], so
that the resorting (upādāna) to a logical reason and a logical example would be
purposeful (sāphalyam)?” Hopkins (1983: 474), too, understands the sentence as a
rhetorical question implying that the opponent will accept the censure, but PSP Tib's
structure has caused some confusion. He translates, “When [Buddhapālita] debates
through just these [consequences] which have the effects [derived] from stating a
reason and example, would the opponent not accept it?" The Tibetan reads: gang las
gtan tshigs dang dpe bkod pa 'bras bu dang bcas par 'gyur ba 'di dag tsam zhig gis
brtsad pa na ci pha rol po khas len par mi byed dam . Earlier interpretations of the
sentence by Stcherbatsky, Seyfort Ruegg and Oetke and my critiques of them appear
in MacDonald 2003: 156-159. Yotsuya (1999: 56, n. 27) provides other previous
translations of the sentence, none of which interpret yataḥ as having a consecutive
function.
The sentence implies that the opponent will indeed accept the Madhyamika's
pointing out that his theory of arising from self is in contradiction with his own
tenets, and will as a result abandon his stance and therefore not require further
elucidation via inference. The consecutive clause of the sentence indicates what
might be considered to be of value, i.e., a full-fledged inference equipped with a
reason and an example, should the opponent not accept the criticism. Note that the
following sentence rejects this possibility by stating that there is in fact no point in
trying to convince such foolish opponents by way of inferences. Thus, with the first
alternative, it is communicated that any reasonable Sankhya opponent will promptly
renounce the position of arising from self when confronted with the consequences of
this position, without needing to be served up a formal inference, and with the
second, it is declared that the Sāṁkhya opponent who refuses to abandon the position
of arising from self even when faced with its unacceptable consequences is such a
dullard that he will also not be swayed by full-fledged inferences. In neither case is
an independent inference of any benefit. These two sentences constitute Candrakīrti's
first argument in defense of Buddhapālita's reliance on statements of [unwanted]
consequence (prasangavākya) and against Bhāviveka's claim that these are
unacceptable and need to be replaced by, or at least supplemented with, independent
inferences.61
he accepts it, of course!] But if the opponent does not withdraw even
with the censure (codanā) that there is contradiction with what [he
him]self maintains, then given [his] extreme shamelessness
(atinirlajjata) he would certainly not withdraw even with [our
resorting to] a reason and example. And we do not debate with a
madman (unmattaka). Thus, the Master [Bhāviveka],131 introducing
an inference even when it is inopportune (asthāna), reveals nothing
but his liking at all costs (sarvatha) ¹32 for inference. But because
he does not maintain any other position (pakṣa), it is not right for the
Madhyamika himself to formulate an autonomous inference
(svatantram anumānam). 133
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§26. And accordingly, Āryadeva has said [in the Catuḥśataka],
Criticism (upālambha) cannot, even with time, be levelled
against one who does not hold the position that [some thing is]
existent (sat), non-existent (asat), or [both] existent and non-
existent (sadasat). 134
131 *LT's author identifies the "Master" as Bhāviveka: ācārya iti bhāvivekaḥ (cf.
Yonezawa 2004: 121, 132 [fol. 1b6]).
132 Even though de La Vallée Poussin's manuscripts read sarvathā, he emended to
tasmāt under the influence of PsP Tib's de'i phyir. PsP Tib appears to have translated
the iti preceding sarvathā as de'i phyir; sarvathā may have been unreadable,
overlooked or purposely not translated. Yotsuya (1999: 57 and n. 34) also emends to
sarvathā on the basis of his manuscript material and Tanji 1988.
133 I understand pakṣāntara (“another/ [any] other position") to refer to positions
other than that of self-arising, such as arising from other, which might be advocated
by the Madhyamika himself and as such would need to be proved in reliance on an
inference composed of a proposition, reason and example; for a detailed explanation,
see Yotsuya 1999: 58-61.
134 Candrakīrti is citing CŚ XVI.25: sad asat sadasac ceti yasya pakṣo na vidyate |
upālambhaś cireṇāpi tasya vaktum na śakyate || (Lang 1986: 150-151). The same
verse is cited by Candrakīrti at MABhed 297.9-12 where the second quarter, as in CŚ
Tib, appears as gang la phyogs ni yod min pa (PsP Tib: phyogs ni gang la'ang yod
min pa); translated by, among others, Tauscher (1981: 60): "Wer keinerlei
Behauptung vertritt, sei es Sein, Nichtsein, oder Sein und Nichtsein zugleich, den zu
widerlegen ist auch in nochsolanger Zeit nicht möglich” and Seyfort Ruegg (2000:
122): "It is not even remotely possible to level a charge against somebody who has
no proposition/position [positing some entity] as existent, non-existent and both62
TRANSLATION
And it has been stated in the Vigrahavyāvartanī,
Were there some thesis (pratijñā) for me, this fault (dosa) would
as a result¹35 become mine;
But for me there is no thesis; therefore [this] fault is indeed not
mine.¹36
existent and non-existent" (cf. also ibid., n. 21; 2002: 28; Hopkins 1983: 585; Lang
1986: 151; Yotsuya 1999: 58).
135 Oetke (1989: 22, n. 5) addresses the problem of the meaning of tataḥ, i.e., as to
whether it should be taken as a co-relative to yadi or if it carries more semantic
weight in the sense of "on account of this" ("aufgrund dessen', d.h. aufgrund des im
yadi-Satz ausgedrückten Sachverhaltes ...”); he takes both possibilities into account
in his translation “dann bestünde für mich (aufgrund dessen) dieser Fehler." I follow
Yotsuya (1999: 59) and Seyfort Ruegg (2000: 115; 2002: 29) in interpreting the word
as intending a reason; Westerhoff (2010: 63) understands tataḥ as a simple co-
relative.
136 Candrakīrti is citing VV 29: yadi kācana pratijñā syān me tata eșa me bhaved
doṣaḥ | nāsti ca mama pratijñā tasmān naivāsti me doṣaḥ || (cf. Bhattacharya et al.
1986: 61; Lindtner 1982b: 80). The reason for the inclusion of the previous verse
from the CŚ and this and the following verse from the VV has been explained
already by Yotsuya (1999: 60) as Candrakīrti's desire to show that the Mādhyamika
"does not embrace any proposition (pratijñā, dam bca') or position (pakṣa, phyogs)
of his own which would posit that something is ultimately existent or non-existent or
which would be based upon something being ultimately apprehended by direct
perception, etc. In the context of the negation of origination from self which we are
examining now, this means that the Mādhyamika engages only in denying the theory
of origination from self. In other words, the Mādhyamika does not entertain any
other position, such as origination from another which would have to be demon-
strated by an inferential statement fully equipped with a proposition, a logical reason
and a logical example."
VV 29 represents the VV author's reply to an opponent who has argued that the
Mādhyamika cannot dismiss his refutation (pratiședha) of the Madhyamaka
statement (vacana, pratijñā) “śūnyāḥ sarvabhāvāḥ” (“all things are empty") as an
impotent one by declaring that the opponent's refutation as a sentence / speech act is
included in all (empty) things because only the Madhyamika asserts that all things
are empty, not the opponent. The Mādhyamika, he continues, is the one setting forth
this assertion that has "attained the characteristic of a thesis" (pratijñālakṣaṇaprāpta)
and that is therefore subject to fault (see VV 4). According to the opponent, there is
an incompatibility between the Madhyamaka statement as a sentence / speech act and
its content, the emptiness of all things: if it exists as a sentence / speech act it
contradicts its content. In his reply to the opponent, the VV author focusses on the
opponent's description of the Madhyamika's assertion as one that has "attained the
characteristic of a thesis," that is, one that is a real (sasvabhāva) thing, and denies thePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
63
If I perceived something by way of things like direct perception
(pratyakṣa) [and the other means of valid cognition], I might
affirm (pravartayeyam) or negate (nivartayeyam) [it];
[But] because that [object of perception] does not exist, I am
without reproach.¹5
137
existence of such a thing, i.e., of the sentence / speech act, for, when all things are as
the content of the statement claims them to be, that is, “when all things are empty,
completely pacified, isolated by nature, how [could there be] a thesis? How [could
there be] the attainment of the characteristic of a thesis? How [could there be] a fault
brought about through the attainment of the characteristic of a thesis?" (see VV ed
61.18-20). The focus in VV 29 and its commentary is then on the ontological status
of the thesis śūnyāḥ sarvabhāvāḥ itself and not, as Candrakīrti would have it here in
the PSP, on the rejection of all theses based on existent (or non-existent) entities. The
step to reinterpreting the denial of a really existing thesis on the ground that nothing
exists to the denial of the possibility of all theses on the ground that nothing exists on
which to base them is, however, a small and inviting one, and one I would hesitate to
deny Candrakīrti awareness of.
For a more detailed discussion of VV 29 and a critique of the interpretations that take
it as evidence for the Madhyamika's utter lack of a philosophical position, see Oetke
1988 and 1989. Oetke (1996: 70), concurring with Wood's interpretation of certain
VV passages, criticizes his translation of VV 29's nāsti ca mama pratijñā as "but I
have no proposition" (see Wood 1994: 106, 111, 313), preferring “but there is no
assertion of mine," since "Nāgārjuna does not want to say that his statement does not
have any propositional content or that he does not intend to state anything with a
propositional content but that his act of assertion as well as the words apparently
occurring as constituents of the sentence uttered are non-existent on the final level of
analysis ... ." I use the translation "thesis" because it is a more faithful rendering of
pratijñā and because Candrakīrti intends it as such. On the thesis in Madhyamaka,
see Ruegg 1977: 49-50; 1981: 78; 1983 and 1986; see also his response to and
critique of Oetke in Seyfort Ruegg 2000: 213-219 (= note 164).
Cp. also MA VI.173: sun 'byin pas sun dbyung bya ma phrad sun ni 'byin byed dam ||
'on te phrad nas yin zhes smras zin nyes pa 'dir gang la || nges par phyogs yod de la
'gyur gyi bdag la phyogs 'di ni || yod pa min pas thal bar 'gyur ba 'di ni srid ma yin ||;
YŞ 50: rtsod med che ba'i bdag nyid can || de dag la ni phyogs med do || gang rnams
la ni phyogs med pa || de la gzhan phyogs ga la yod || (YȘVed 89) and YSV to 50cd:
gang gi tshe de ltar dngos po med pas bdag dang gzhan gyi phyogs med pa de'i tshe
de Itar mthong ba rnams kyi nyon mongs pa rnams nges par 'gag par 'gyur ro ||
(YSV ed 90.1-3; YṢV 294 and n. 640).
tr
137 Candrakīrti cites Vigrahavyāvartanī 30: yadi kiñcid upalabheyam pravartayeyam
nivartayeyam vā | pratyakṣādibhir arthais tadabhāvān me nupālambhaḥ || (cf.
Bhattacharya et al. 1986: 62; Lindtner 1982b: 80). The VV commentary makes it
clear that pāda c has to be construed with pāda a, not with b as the syntax might
suggest. Translations of the verse vary as to the interpretation of the referent of the64
TRANSLATION
pronoun tat of tadabhāvāt. Seyfort Ruegg does not specify the referent ("[but]
because of their absence" [2000: 115; 2002: 29, 55]), but Westerhoff (2010: 68),
translating “But because that does not exist," clarifies his understanding of tat with
the statement “That' here refers to the presupposition of substantially existent
epistemic instruments." Yotsuya (1999: 59) in one instance of translation understands
the referent of tat to be the pramāṇas: “[but] since there is no such [direct perception,
etc., on my part],” but in another (ibid., 103) takes the referent to be both the object
perceived and the pramāṇas: "[but] since there is no such [thing or direct perception,
etc., on my part]." Bhattacharya, on the other hand, understands the referent of tat to
be solely kiñcit; he translates: "[But] since that thing does not exist" (see
Bhattacharya et al. 1986: 114); similarly Tillemans (1992: 316, n. 5): “But as such a
thing is inexistent" and Wood (1994: 112): “But there is no such thing." These latter
three translations are more to the point given the opponent's supposition, expressed
in VV 5 and 6, that the Mādhyamika would only be able to negate the things of the
world if he had first apprehended them by way of a means of valid cognition. The
VV author here in his response points out that there are simply no things to be
apprehended. In this way he elegantly refutes the idea that he first apprehends the
things he denies existence to and neatly pulls the rug out from under the opponent's
arguments, namely (see the commentary on VV 5), that the Mādhyamika cannot
apprehend things because direct perception (pratyakṣa) is empty, because the
individual perceiving the objects of perception is empty, and because any other
means or objects of valid cognition presumed to be necessary for the Madhyamika’s
denial of them are empty (see the commentary on VV 6). I further think it is
precipitous, given the context, to interpret the negation as intended of the pramāṇas
since the long section refuting the pramāṇas actually only commences with VV 31;
VV 30 is, in one sense, a verse introducing the pramāṇas as “things” (artha)—the
term under which they will be discussed in the following section and serves as a
lead-in to VV 31 where the opponent's argument that (perceptible) things are
established by the pramāṇas allows the discussion refuting the establishment of the
pramāṇas to get underway. Note too that VV 30's commentary focusses attention on
the verse's kincit with its gloss of it as “thing” (artham): yato¹ 'rtham evāham kamcin
nopalabhe tasmān na pravartayāmi na nivartayāmi | tatraivam sati ... (cf. VVed 15).
¹The first two words of the sentence at VVed 62.13 (= Johnston and Kunst's edition)
are given as yathārtham, but this has been silently emended by Bhattacharya to yato
'rtham (VVed 15; Bhattacharya's translation is however based on yathā, which he
understands as having the sense of a causal particle: "[but] since I do not even
apprehend an object of any kind” [VVed 114]). yathā, originally conjectured by
Sānkṛtyāyana and then adopted by Johnston and Kunst, does not appear in the VV
manuscript (cf. VVed 62, n. 7 and Yonezawa 2008: 270, n. 6) and was possibly
influenced by VV Tib's ji ltar. This ji ltar, however, is construed with a following
yang; the VV Tib translators may have read kathamcit instead of kamcit/kimcit (VV
Tib: ngas don ji ltar yang ma dmigs pas [D 129a1; P 147a1; Yonezawa 2008: 271]).
The VV manuscript has neuter kiñcit (VV ms: kiñcin) in place of VVed commentary's
kamcit.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
65
§27. And when in this way the Mādhyamika does not state an
independent inference (svatantrānumāna), how [could there possibly
be] an independent thesis (svatantrā pratijñā) [like Bhāviveka's,
viz.,] “The inner bases (āyatanāni) have not arisen from self,'
regard to which the Sankhyas could object,
99138
in
What is the meaning here of the thesis? Do [you deny that a thing
that already] has the nature of an effect (kāryātmaka) [arises]
*LT's author limits his comments to: pratyakṣādipratītair arthaiḥ karaṇabhūtaiḥ
kiñcit (ms: kiñcita) pravartayeyam (ms: pravartte) nivartayeyam (ms: nirvartteyam)
vā (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 121, 132 [fol. 1b6-7]). He may have had difficulty with the
construction of the verse, i.e., with its placement of part of the protasis after the
apodosis, and therefore considered it necessary to note the intended meaning.
138 "The inner bases have not arisen from self" is the proposition of the independent
inference constructed by Bhāviveka to prove non-arising from self. Immediately
following his citation of MMK I.1, Bhāviveka comments that the kārikā sets forth
[only] the general thesis ('di ni dam bcas pa’i spyi bkod pa yin), adding that a mere
thesis (pratijñāmātra; dam bcas pa tsam) does not establish the meaning of the
intended statement and thus he utilizes a property of the subject (pakṣadharma;
phyogs kyi chos), namely, “existing” [as the probans]. This reason can be drawn out
of "from self" of the kārikā because “from self” is stated in regard to own-being,
which [already] exists. An example, he states, can be found by virtue of the property
to be proved (sādhya; bsgrub par bya ba) and the property that proves
(sādhanadharma; sgrub pa'i chos), because it is an example of a property possessor
that possesses the property to be proved and the property that proves, [both of] which
are generally acknowledged: dam bcas pa tsam gyis bsams (P: bsam) pa'i tshig gi don
mi 'grub pa'dir phyogs kyi chos ni yod pa nyid yin par gzung ste | 'di ltar bdag las
zhes bya ba ni bdag nyid yod pa la snyad gdags pa’i phyir ro || dpe ni bsgrub (P:
sgrub) par bya ba dang | sgrub pa'i chos kyi dbang gis te bsgrub (P: sgrub) par bya
ba dang sgrub pa'i chos grags pa dang ldan pa'i chos can gyi dpe yin pa'i phyir (PP
D 48b5-6; P 58a1-2; cf. Kajiyama 1963: 48; Ames 1993: 221).
The inference in PP is set forth as: don dam par nang gi skye mched rnams bdag las
skye ba med par nges te | yod pa'i phyir dper na shes pa yod pa nyid bzhin no || (D
49a2-3; P 58b1-2. Ames (1993: 222) translates: [Thesis:] In ultimate reality, it is
certain that the inner āyatanas do not originate from themselves, [Reason:] because
they exist [already], [Example:] like consciousness (caitanya)." Candrakīrti cites the
inference at PsPM §39 (PSP₁ 25.9-26.1) with the words na paramārthata
ādhyātmikāny āyatanāni svata utpannāni vidyamānatvāc caitanyavat. The PsP Tib
translators cite directly from PP; they do not modify the text to make it accord with
PSP Skt, which does not attest an equivalent for nges.66
TRANSLATION
139
from self¹3⁹ (i.e., reproduces itself) or [do you deny that a thing
that still] has the nature of a cause (kāraṇātmaka) [arises from
self] (i.e., reproduces itself)?¹40 And what [follows] from this? If
[you deny that a thing that] has the nature of an effect
[reproduces itself], there is the proving [by you the
Madhyamika] of what is [already] established (siddhasādhana)
[for us Sankhyas]. If [you deny that a thing that] has the nature of
a cause [reproduces itself], [then your reason] is contradictory
(viruddhārthatā),¹4¹ because all that arises (utpattimat) arises
only as something existing with the nature of a cause. 142
139 Note that PP Tib and PsP Tib attest a zhes bya ba after bdag las for which no
equivalent iti is found in PsP Skt (ci bdag las zhes bya ba 'bras bu’i bdag nyid las
sam | 'on te rgyu’i bdag nyid las yin grang). It is difficult to know if zhes bya ba is
reflecting an iti that actually stood in PP Skt or if it represents an addition or the PP
Tib translators' interpretation. A translation for the final iti, on the other hand, is not
attested.
L
140 I have already discussed ms P's readings kāryātmakaḥ and kāraṇātmakaḥ vs.
PsP₁'s kāryātmakāt and kāraṇātmakāt in an earlier article (cf. MacDonald 2003: 162-
167); ms Q's readings kāryātmanaḥ and kāraṇātmanaḥ are discussed and rejected in
MacDonald 2008: 30-33. PsP Tib's bras bu'i bdag nyid las (for PsP Skt's kā-
ryātmakaḥ) and rgyu’i bdag nyid las (for PsP Skt's kāraṇātmakaḥ) cannot be taken as
support for ms Q's ablative readings because it has been copied in from PP Tib and
does not reflect PsP Skt. Candrakīrti has purposely revised what were probably
ablatives in PP Skt to nominatives in order to place emphasis on things as causes as
the subject of arising (as opposed to things as effects as the subject of arising).
Readers unfamiliar with the earlier articles are referred to Appendix VIII for my
arguments for the superiority of ms P's readings.
14¹ Here in the PSP citation the Sankhyas state that if the Mādhyamika intends to
argue that something already existing with the nature of an effect does not reproduce
itself, then the inference refuting arising from self would prove what is already
established for the Sānkhya (siddhasādhana), because the Sānkhya rejects that things
already existing as effects reproduce themselves, e.g., that a pot that has already
manifested reproduces itself. In the second case, given that it is a fundamental
Sāṁkhya presupposition that things exist with the nature of a cause and then arise,
i.e., manifest, if the Mādhyamika intends to argue that things existing with the nature
of a cause do not reproduce themselves, the thesis ends up being contradicted,
because only things that exist in a non-manifest state, that is, exist with the nature of
a cause, arise.
142 The objection appears in PP Tib as follows: 'dir grangs can dag las kha cig phyir
zlog par byed de | dam bcas pa 'di'i don¹ gang yin | ci bdag las zhes bya ba 'bras bu’i
bdag nyid las sam | 'on te rgyu'i bdag nyid las des cir 'gyur² | gal te 'bras bu’i bdagPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
67
How could there be for us (the Mādhyamikas) the reason (hetu)
"because [they] are [already] existing" (vidyamānatvāt), which [the
Sankhyas claim] would have the [fault of] proving what is [already]
established (siddhasādhana) or [the fault of] being contradictory
(viruddharthatā),¹ so that we would have to endeavour to refute this
143
nyid las³ na ni grub pa la sgrub boª (D: grub pa bsgrub bo) | 'on te5 rgyu'i bdag nyid
las na ni don 'gal ba nyid de¹ | skye ba can³ thams cad ni rgyu'i bdag nyid du yod pa
kho na las skye ba'i phyir ro zhe na (D 49a3-5; P 58b3-5; cf. Kajiyama 1963: 49;
Ames 1993: 222); PsP Tib: ¹dam bca' ba'i don 'di for dam bcas pa 'di'i don; ²yin
grang de las cir 'gyur | for des cir 'gyur ; ³adds following yin; grub pa la sgrub pa
yin la for grub pa la sgrub bo; ³omits 'on te; adds following yin; 7'gal ba’i don nyid
du 'gyur te for don 'gal ba nyid de; skye ba dang ldan pa for skye ba can; 'without
las. This section as found in the PSP is reproduced, translated and commented on in
Yotsuya 1999: 61-64. Bhāviveka deals with the objection in the PP by declaring it
inapplicable, since he negates mere (tsam) arising from self (see PP D 49a5; P 58b5-
6).
On the Sankhya theory of the manifestation of all entities from the “Ur-matter”
prakṛti, see, e.g., Frauwallner 1984: 275ff., 303-307; Chakravarti 1975: 215-221;
Larson and Bhattacharya 1987: 100-101, 246-249. That the Sāṁkhyas hold that an
effect is not substantially different from its cause is declared, e.g., at YD 109.13-14:
na hi naḥ kāraṇād arthāntarabhūtam kāryam utpadyata ity abhyupagamaḥ. An effect
is merely the differentiated manifestation of the subtle undifferentiated cause: idānīm
sattvam rajas tamaḥ puruṣa iti padārthacatuṣṭayam pratijñāyate | tatrāpi puruṣa-
kartṛtvam pratyākhyāyate | tasmin pratyākhyāte guṇānām evāvasthāntarāpekṣaḥ
kāryakāraṇabhāvaḥ | sūkṣmāṇām mūrtilābhaḥ kāryam | nivṛttavišeṣāṇām avibhā-
gātmanāvasthānam kāraṇam ity ayam siddhāntaḥ | (YD 62.8-12). See YD 109-125
for its defense and explication of the five reasons set forth in Sankhyakārikā 9 for the
pre-existence of the effect in the cause.
143 viruddhārthatā refers to the fact that the reason proves a thing or a state of affairs
opposite to what the probandum aims to establish. For example, the reason “because
it is created" for the probandum “sound is permanent" does not prove that sound is
permanent, and instead proves that it is impermanent. The contradictory reason
(viruddho hetuḥ) is thus classified as a fallacious reason (hetvābhāsa). Cf. NM 4
(Tucci 1930: 23f.) and NM 9 (= PS III.27: dharmadharmisvarūpasya tadviseṣasya
caiva saḥ | viparītopakāritvād viruddho 'sati bādhane || (cf. Katsura 2009: 159); Tib:
chos dang chos can rang ngo bo | yang na de yi khyad par rnams || phyin ci log tu
sgrub pa'i phyir | gnod med pa la 'gal ba yin “It is, when there is no sublation [of the
proposition], a contradictory [reason] because it serves for (= proves) the opposite of
the essential characteristic (svarūpa) of the subject (dharmin) or of its attribute
(dharma) [or of both the dharmin and dharma] or of their particular characteristics
(viseșa)"; cf. Tucci 1930: 35; Katsura 1979a: 78f.; also Tucci 1929: 481). I do not
translate artha of viruddhārthatā (“being [something] having a contradictory68
TRANSLATION
proving of what is [already] established and [this] being
contradictory?¹44 Therefore, simply because the faults adduced by the
[Sankhya] opponent are not entailed, the Master Buddhapalita does
not need to describe their refutation (tatparihāra).
145
§28. Even if it were [argued]: [It] may [indeed] be, since
Madhyamikas do not state independent inferences (svatantrānumāna)
owing to the fact that propositions (pakṣa),146 reasons (hetu) and
examples (dṛṣṭānta) are not established [for them], that there is
neither proof (sādhana) of the content (artha) of the thesis (pratijñā)
negating arising from self nor refutation (nirākaraṇa) of the
opponent's thesis by way of an inference established for both [parties
meaning/content") for the sake of simplicity. Steinkellner's (1988: 1429) translation
"object" for artha of viparītārtha[hetu] (“(reasons) that have a contradictory object")
presumably refers to the sādhya proved by this reason, i.e., this sādhya is opposite to
the sādhya sought to be proved.
144
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 30) translates the last part of the sentence, which has a con-
secutive sense, as a separate sentence, and thereby brings in a meaning unintended by
Candrakīrti. He translates the sentence as "How, for us [Madhyamikas], could there
be the inferential reason ... for which there might exist [the fault of either]
siddhasādhana or viruddhārthatā? We will [indeed] seek to avoid any [argument]
incurring [the faults in debate of either] establishment of the [already] established or
a sense that is contradictory."
145 mā bhūt, here in relationship with tu, has a concessive sense; see, e.g., the same
construction at PsP₁273.12-13: nanu ca bhāvānām svabhāvo nāstīty abhyupaga-
cchato mā bhūd bhāvadarśanābhāvāc chāśvatadarśanam ucchedadarśanam tu
niyatam prasajyate. The translators of PsP Tib have also understood mā bhūt in con-
nection with tu as intended in a concessive sense (ma gyur mod); note that Hopkins
(1983: 140) brings in the concessive sense by translating: “[Bhāvaviveka] might
think, ‘[I might allow that] ... autonomous inferences are not to be expressed ... .
Still,
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 30) translates mā bhūt prohibitively and his
translation for tu is, probably merely due to an oversight, marked as a translation for
mā bhūt: "Because Madhyamikas do not formulate an autonomous inference ... there
should exist neither the establishment of a thesis-sense nor the rejection of the
opponent's thesis ... . Yet (mā bhūt : mod) ….. .” *LȚ's author also interprets mā bhūt
in a prohibitive sense (on his reading and interpretation of the passage, see n. 151).
999
146
It is possible that pakṣa includes reference to both the subject of the inference and
the proposition.69
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
of the debate] (ubhayasiddha);¹47 nevertheless, there must be criticism
(codanayā) ¹48 of the opponent's thesis for being in contradiction with
147 That the reason and subject must be established for both parties in a debate has
been declared by Dignāga in PS III.11 (Skt in Katsura 2009: 157; cf. also PVBh
647.9): dvayoḥ siddhena dharmeṇa vyavahārād viparyaye | dvayor ekasya sandehe
(PVBh: cāsiddhau for sandehe) dharmyasiddhau ca nesyate ||: "Because one works
[in a debate] with a property [of the subject] that is established for the two [parties in
the debate], when [this property = the reason] is [assumed to be] the opposite for both
or [even] one [of the parties], when [it is in] doubt [for both or for one] and when the
property possessor (= subject) is not established [for both or for one], [it is] not
accepted." At PSPM §59 (PSP₁ 35.5-6) Candrakīrti will cite Dignāga's regulation
regarding the reason (hetu) as found in the NM and inform Dignāga and his followers
of the allowance that must be made for the Madhyamaka situation. See also
Dignāga's commentary ad NM kārikā 2 where he states that the reason must be
accepted by both disputants (cf. Tucci 1930: 13; Katsura 1977: 122, where the equi-
valence to the words pakṣadharmo vādiprativādiniścito grhyate in Vibhūticandra's
commentary ad PV 3.17 is noted). See Yotsuya 1999: 63, n. 61 for the three types of
inference distinguished by Candrakīrti.
148 My arguments for the reading codanayā attested by ms P, as against ms Q's and
*LŢ's codanāyām, have been presented in an earlier article (see MacDonald 2000:
172, n. 23). In brief, the reading codanāyām cannot be accepted because it disturbs
the obviously intended symmetry between the components of the two parts of the
sentence, namely, between proof and refutation by way of a reasoning whose subject,
etc., is established for both parties (ubhayasiddhena) being conceded as inappropriate
(mā bhūt), on the one hand, and, on the other, criticism of contradiction with a
reasoning accepted by the opponent alone by way of a pakṣa, etc., from the
opponent's point of view alone (svata eva), being demanded (bhavitavyam) in their
place. The ms Q and *LȚ reading codanāyām becomes definitively disqualified when
the line of argumentation is taken into consideration, for codanāyām brings with it
the implication that the Mādhyamika addressed by Candrakīrti's Bhāviveka does
indeed, of his own accord, criticize the opponent's pratijñā by way of a svata
evānumāna and needs merely to be reminded that this anumāna must have a faultless
pakṣa, etc., an implication in no way supported by the text preceding the sentence;
the svata evānumāna that will be drawn out of Buddhapālita's prasanga in the
section following the sentence under discussion represents merely Candrakīrti's
concession to the demand for a svata evānumāna. See further comments below in
Appendix IX. For my criticism of Oetke's 2003 translation of the passage, see
MacDonald 2003: 168ff. (Oetke's construal of the sentence in Oetke 2006: 63 is also
problematic). Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 30f.) takes PSP Tib into consideration for his
translation of codanayā: “in view of <the need for> an explicit ruling (codanā : brjod
par ni bya dgos pas)" and construes bhavitavyam with pakṣādibhiḥ. Yonezawa’s
(2004: 132, n. 2) suggestion to accept codanāyām and construe bhavitavyam with70
TRANSLATION
an inference just from [his] own (= the opponent's) [point of view]
(svata evānumāna) 149 by way of a proposition and so forth that are
free of the faults (apakṣāla) ¹50 of the proposition (pakṣa), reason
(hetu) and example (dṛṣṭānta), [each of which is established] only
from [his] (= the opponent's) own [point of view].151 And therefore,
because those [namely, a proposition together with a reason and
example] have not been stated and because their faults [as
pratijñārthasādhanam and parapratijñānirākaraṇam of the concessive clause would
result in a serious misrepresentation of Candrakīrti’s intent.
14⁹ As stated below in Appendix IX, Tillemans has drawn attention to Stcherbatsky's
wrong understanding of svata eva and corrected it. Nevertheless, both Oetke (2003:
116; 2006: 55ff.) and Matsumoto (2011: 277ff.) argue for svata eva as referring to
the Mādhyamika. See my comments on the passage in MacDonald 2003: 168ff.
Hopkins (1983: 480) translates PSP Tib's rang gi of rang gi rjes su dpag pas as
"one's own" and does not translate rang nyid la of rang nyid la phyogs la sogs pa, but
he quite clearly understands that an inference acknowledged by the opponent (i.e., an
other-acknowledged inference) is being called for; he translates rang gi rjes su dpag
pas as "through one's own [other-approved] inference."
150
On the emendation apakṣāla, see MacDonald 2000: 174, n. 24. The *LȚ precludes
de La Vallée Poussin's conjecture doșa in that it employs doșa as the word with
which apakṣāla is glossed; it presents, however, the corruption apakṣātmā for
apakṣāla (tm undoubtedly a simple misreading of 1) in the explanatory phrase
kimbhūtaiḥ pakṣādīnām apakṣālā doșas tena rahitaiḥ | (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 121, 133
[fol. 1b7]).
151 An inference admitted only by the opponent (svata evānumāna) does not require
or imply any ontological commitment on the part of the Mādhyamika. This sort of
inference consists of a subject, a reason and an example taken from the opponent's
own stockpile of approved and propounded entities, concepts and tenets, and is
constructed in such a way that the opponent must accept its thesis; but its thesis will
be in contradiction with another thesis of the opponent's, in the present case with the
Sankhya thesis of arising from self. The contradiction made evident by the other-
acknowledged inference will force the Sankhya to relinquish the thesis of arising
from self. On Candrakīrti's use of this type of inference, see Yoshimizu forthcoming.
*LȚ's author misunderstands the passage, taking the scope of mā bhūt to be limited
to the preceding svata utpattipratiședhapratijñārthasādhanam and the phrases that
follow mā bhūt as indicating the recommended, admonished mode of procedure for
the Mādhyamika side of the debate: parapratijñānirākaraṇan tu mādhyamikasya
yujyate | ubhayasiddhānumānena | anumānena virodhacodanāyāṇ tasyānumānasya
pakṣādibhir bhāvyam | (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 121, 133 [fol. 1b7]).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
71
pronounced earlier by the Sankhya opponent] have not been refuted,
that very fault [remains]. 152
152
[We would] reply: No, this is not the case. [For] what reason?
Because [it is] of course (hi) [that disputant] who proposes a [certain]
matter (artha) who should, with the desire to bring about certainty
(niscaya) in others analogous to [his] own certainty,153 teach the other
[party] exactly the reasoning (upapatti) by means of which [he] has
come to understand this matter. Therefore this, first, is the regular
procedure (nyāya): Only the opponent (pareṇa) has to employ a proof
Yotsuya (1999: 64) interprets tadanabhidhānāt as a tatpurușa-compound, under-
standing its tat to refer to criticism by way of a pakṣa, etc. (“Therefore, because that
[censure by means of such a proposition, etc.,] is not presented"). He interprets
taddoṣāparihārāt as a tatpuruṣa-compound with a karmadhāraya-compound as the
first member: “because these faults [which are raised by the opponent]." I interpret
taddoṣāparihārāt as a tatpuruṣa-compound with another tatpurușa-compound as its
first member and thus take tat of both compounds to refer to the elements wanted by
the criticism, namely, the pakṣa, the hetu and the dṛṣṭānta; with this, the original
criticism (cf. PSPM §23) is better reflected in the first compound, and the tat of the
second does not require a new referent. *LȚ's author also appears to wish to indicate
that both anaphoric pronouns refer to pakṣa, hetu and dṛṣṭānta: tadanabhidhānāt
pakṣādyanabhidhānāt | taddoṣaḥ pakṣādidoṣaḥ (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 121, 133 [fol.
1b7-2a1]).
=
153 Candrakīrti quotes NM 13ab PS IV.6ab: svaniscayavad anyeṣām niścayotpāda-
necchayā |. (PS IV.6cd: pakṣadharmatvasambandhasādhyokter anyavarjanam ||; Skt
for the verse and sources attesting it in Muni Jambuvijayaji 1966: 134; cf. also Tucci
1930: 44 and n. 79; Katsura 1979a: 73f.). Tillemans (1992: 317) has also recognized
that this pāda is embedded in Candrakīrti's text. The construction of the rest of the
sentence in PsP Tib differs slightly from the Skt: ... don 'di'i 'thad pa gang gi sgo nas
khong du chud pa'i 'thad pa de nyid gzhan la bsnyad par bya dgos so || (PsP Skt:
yayopapattyāsāv artho 'dhigataḥ saivopapattiḥ parasmāy upadeṣṭavyā). Candrakīrti
cites this famous half-verse of Dignāga's as part of his refutational strategy and not
because he consistently, at least for debates dealing with the ultimate level, took as
his standard Dignāgean logic. The view put forth in the part of the verse he cites,
namely, that one should strive to engender in the opponent the same certainty already
attained for oneself, is in fact not specific to Dignāgean logic but is applicable to the
context of debate no matter what one's own position on logic and argumentation is.
Candrakīrti does seem to have accepted Dignāga's regulations for debate within the
context of debates dealing with aspects of superficial reality. He may secondarily cite
Dignāga as an authority here in order to catch the attention of Bhaviveka's followers
and have them take his response seriously.72
of the matter proposed [on the basis of that] which [he him]self
maintains.154 But the [opponent] (sa) 155 here (ayam) [in the present
TRANSLATION
154 *LT: tasmāt pareṇaiva svapratijñātārthasādhanam hetudṛṣṭāntādibhir upādeyam
nāsmābhiḥ | (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 121f., 133 [fol. 2a1]). PsP Tib is translated in the
usual relative-co-relative style employed for Sanskrit constructions with yat used as a
conjunction: de’i phyir rang gis khas blangs pa'i dam bcas pa'i don gyi sgrub par
byed pa ni pha rol po kho nas nye bar dgod par bya ba gang yin pa de ni re zhig lugs
yin no ||.
155 The relevant text for the passage as it appears in de La Vallée Poussin's edition
reads: tasmād eṣa tāvan nyāyo | yat pareṇaiva svābhyupagatapratijñātārthasādhanam
upādeyam | na cāyam param prati [hetuḥ] | hetudṛṣṭāntāsambhavāt pratijñānusāra-
tayaiva kevalam svapratijñātārthasādhanam upādatta iti nirupapattikapakṣābhyupa-
gamāt svātmānam evāyam kevalam visamvādayan na śaknoti pareṣām niścayam
ādhātum iti (PsP₁ 19.3-6). All of the Skt manuscripts attest the negative particle na in
place of sa (na cāyam) at the beginning of the second sentence (ms Q's aksara is
poorly formed but appears to be a na); the PSP Tib of the four editions and the
Golden manuscript unanimously support na with ma yin. De La Vallée Poussin
suggests the conjecture hetuḥ (na cāyam param prati [hetuḥ] | hetudṛṣṭāntāsam-
bhavāt) on the basis of PsP Tib which reads 'di ni gzhan la gtan tshigs kyang ma yin
no ||. The sentence as such, whether de La Vallée Poussin's conjecture is accepted or
not, is problematic, as attested by the various modern translations of the passage (see
MacDonald 2000: 174-177). The Sanskrit manuscripts, however, do not attest a
danda after na cāyam param prati, and thereby inform that na cāyam param prati
was understood by the tradition as the first few words of a much longer sentence. The
sentence read with the manuscripts' na cannot be made to yield a contextually
meaningful and satisfying sense and I have therefore emended na to sa (cf. ibid.,
177f.). The corruption of sa to na is immediately explainable given that in various
north Indian scripts sa can easily be mistaken for na if its upper left stroke has
incurred damage or if the akṣara is faded. That this must have been an early
corruption is demonstrated by PsP Tib. I assume that Pa tshab and his Indian colla-
borators, finding na cāyam param prati hetudṛṣṭāntāsambhavāt, etc., in their
manuscripts and struggling with the problems it presents, attempted to solve the
problem by decapitating the sentence and by adding gtan tshigs to the severed part to
set it off as an independent sentence. It is also possible that they were confronted
with a dittography in one of their manuscripts, i.e., hetuhetudṛṣṭāntāsambhavāt and
were on its account inspired to construe the extra word with their independent sen-
tence.
The *LT attests the sentence in question as commencing with tac cāyam instead of na
cāyam, a variant which, like na of the PsP manuscripts, has to be rejected (see
MacDonald 2000: 178, n. 32 for reasons for the rejection and paleographical remarks
on the variant). It would seem, however, that *LȚ's author was in fact relying on a
manuscript of the PsP that read sa cāyam and that the *LȚ's copied sa cāyam
degenerated independently to tac cāyam due to scribal error and interference (thePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
73
debate], (i.e., the Sankhya), on account of in the view of [his]
opponent (= the Madhyamika)¹56 the impossibility of [valid] reasons
and examples, employs (upādatte) a proof ¹57 of the matter he has
proposed only (kevalam) in such a way that [its sound] core (sāra) is
nothing but his (sva) mere thesis (pratijñāmātra)!¹58 Thus, since he
other scribal errors in the extant *LȚ show that it is a copied manuscript). The *LŢ
two sentences previous to tac cāyam reads: tasmāt pareṇaiva svapratijñātārtha-
sādhanam hetudṛṣṭāntādibhir upādeyam nāsmābhiḥ | (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 121f., 133
[fol. 2a1]). The next sentence, which introduces the “citation" tac cāyam, reads: atha
so pi paro (Yonezawa 1999 and 2004: pare; *LȚ manuscript and Matsumoto 2005:
paro) vinā hetvādibhiḥ param pratipādayiṣyatīty āha | tac cāyam ityādi ||. The state-
ment so pi paro vinā hetvādibhiḥ param pratipadayiṣyati clearly represents the *LȚ
author's paraphrase of PsP's sa (according to the *LȚ manuscript's citation: tac)
cāyam param prati hetudṛṣṭāntāsambhavāt svapratijñātārthasādhanam upādatte.
*LT's paro is undoubtedly intended as a gloss of the sa of the same paraphrase. The
*LȚ author's citation and gloss of sa confirms that he read sa in the PsP manuscript
available to him and that the PSPM sa can be definitely be accepted as the original
reading. This "hidden jewel" of the *LT paraphrase (but not of the *LȚ manuscript's
actual "citation" of the text, i.e., tac cāyam, the sa of which has degenerated to tac!)
bespeaks the testimonial importance of such commentaries.
156 Cf. MW s.v. prati: mām prati “according to me, in my opinion, ... to me.”
157 Ms P and the paper manuscripts attest ºmātram in place of ᵒsādhanam; ms Q's
reading has been lost due to breakage. I follow de La Vallée Poussin in emending the
text (cf. PSP₁ 19.4 and n. 6). PsP Tib attests rang gi dam bca' ba'i don gyi sgrub par
byed pa (= svapratijñārthasādhanam). The change of ᵒsādhanam to ᵒmātram may
have occurred when the scribe's eye, attracted by svapratijñā in the previous com-
pound, skipped back to this compound as he was about to write sādhanam (the
akṣaras mā and să are easily confused in the older north Indian scripts).
158 Candrakīrti commences the sentence beginning with sa cāyam by declaring that
the Sankhya tries to prove his position with reasons and examples that are, from the
point of view of the Mādhyamika, just bogus supports for the thesis he aims to prove.
Since the reasons and examples in his proof are faulty, the Sankhya ends up proving
his proposition by way of an argument that has nothing but (eva) his mere (mātra)
claim, i.e., nothing but his own thesis (svapratijñā), as its “[sound] core" (sāra), as
the sound element in it that cannot be invalidated, as the argument's solid, sturdy
heartwood. Obviously Candrakīrti is using the word sāra ironically. Without a reason
and example to support it, the thesis is not at all sturdy; it is actually extremely
shaky, indeed on the verge of a total collapse. The accumulation of the elements
mātra, eva and kevalam in the Sanskrit sentence indicates strong emphasis: mātra
sets the limit, eva underscores this limit as definite (“nothing but”), and kevalam may
be adding a nuance of the deficiency and pitifulness of such an argument.74
TRANSLATION
maintains a proposition (pakṣa) lacking justification (nirupapatti), he,
fooling (visamvādayan) only himself [with respect to the soundness
of his inference],159 is not able to instill certainty (niścaya) in [his]
opponents. Just this is the [Madhyamika's] very clear criticism of
him, namely, [he] is incapable of proving the matter he has
proposed; 160 under these circumstances (atra), what is the point of
The sentence is also interesting because it is an example of one of Candrakīrti's
trademark methods for neutralizing an opponent's critique. The more usual version
of this method involves Candrakīrti criticizing the opponent for having exactly the
fault he has accused Candrakīrti of; he turns the critique back on the critiquer, some-
times with an even more devastating element added to it. Here the situation is
indirect: he turns Bhāviveka's critique of Buddhapālita's prasanga statement, i.e.,
that it lacks a reason and example, on the opponent Sānkhya; he thus indirectly turns
it on Bhāviveka by turning it on the Sankhya. Candrakīrti here charges the opponent,
as Bhāviveka does Buddhapālita and other opponents in the PP, with arguing for his
position with a "mere thesis" (pratijñāmātra). He also takes Bhāviveka's criticism of
Buddhapalita one step further: the Sānkhya, unlike Buddhapālita who, according to
Bhāviveka, has not utilized a reason and example and must merely add them, utilizes
reasons and examples that fall apart under the Mādhyamika's critical eye; logically
sound reasons and examples, given the Sānkhya's indefensible position of arising
from self, are impossible for the Sankhya.
PSP Tib reads khas 'ches pa'i rjes su 'brangs pa 'ba' zhig ("solely following the
thesis") for svapratijñāmātrasāratayaiva kevalam. De La Vallée Poussin, influenced
by PSP Tib's khas 'ches pa'i rjes su 'brangs pa, emends to pratijñānusāratayaiva. Ms
P and all of the paper manuscripts attest svapratijñāmātrasāratayaiva kevalam; Ms Q
has been corrupted to svapratijñānanga(?)ye(?)prāptayaiva. pratijñānusāratayaiva, if
actually responsible for PsP Tib's reading, may simply have been the result of an
eyeskip from jñāºs ā stroke to the ā stroke concluding ᵒmãᵒ, which was followed
by a misreading of the akṣara tra as the akṣara nu.
159 Hopkins (1983: 481) has correctly interpreted PsP Tib's bdag nyid kho na la slu
bar byed pa(s) as “deceives just himself,” but has wrongly taken the agent of the act
of deception to be the argument itself, which of course the masculine ayam as PSP
Skt's agent of the action prohibits (idam would be required for a reference to
sādhanam). Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 32) does not explain why he interprets svātmānam
evāyam kevalam visamvādayan to mean “and being in conflict in respect to [the term]
svātman '[from] itself.""
"
16⁰ One might even be justified in reading the full passage as an interpretation of
Buddhapālita's intention: His statement of unwanted consequence was merely
intended to show, or at least allude to, the inability of the Sankhya's argument to
prove (sādhanāsamarthya) his own thesis.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
75
bringing out the sublation [of his thesis] by means of an inference
(anumānabādhā)1612162
§29. Even if [Bhāviveka insists:] The fault of contradiction with an
inference from [the Sankhya's] own [point of view] (svato
'numānavirodhadoșa) must definitely be brought out [by way of the
Madhyamika's employment of such an inference, i.e., one
acknowledged only by the Sankhya].¹6.
163
162
161 A proposition (pakṣa) that is susceptible to sublation by an inference (anumāna-
bādhā) is the fifth of the five pakṣābhāsas enumerated in NM; cf. Tucci 1930: 7f.;
Katsura 1977: 113; Preisendanz 1994: 319-323 (= n. 88). That sublation can be also
accomplished by an other-acknowledged inference, and that the inference's reason is
responsible for the sublation is confirmed and explained at PSPM §57 (PsP₁ 34.13ff.).
My interpretation of the paragraph differs from that presented in Oetke 2003; a
detailed critique can be found in MacDonald 2003: 168ff. Oetke's response to my
critique appears in Oetke 2006. I remain unconvinced by his arguments and thus do
not respond to them here. Oetke considers sa of sa cāyam to refer not to the Sankhya,
but to "a Madhyamika." Matsumoto (2011: 289ff.) considers sa of sa cāyam to refer
to Bhāviveka. I am also unconvinced by his arguments, and hope to respond to them
in a separate article.
Pa tshab appears to be summing up this passage in his (or his student's?) Tshig gsal
ba'i dka' ba bshad pa / bla ma tshong dpon pan di ta’i gdam ngag (bKa' gdams gsung
'bum, vol. 11, 149.i.7-8) when he states that the Sānkhya has to state a reasoning to
the Madhyamika: de’i don ni grangs can gyis rang la[s] skye ba bsgrub pa’i phyir |
dbu ma pa la rang las skye ba'i grub pa’i 'thad brjod pa bya ba yin pa la | de ma
brjod pa nyid kyis rang gi khas blangs pa la rang nyid kyis gnod pa sgrub byed ma
brjod pa nyid kyis bkag pa yin no | “The meaning of this [passage in the Prasanna-
padā] is: Since the Sankhya [wishes to] establish arising from self, a reasoning for
the establishment of arising from self is to be stated to the Mādhyamika. By the very
non-stating of that, his own [= the Sankhya's] assertions are invalidated by himself;
by the very non-stating of a proof, [the Sānkhya's assertions] are negated." My
thanks to Kevin Vose for bringing the comment to my attention and for providing me
with the text passage.
163
=
Seyfort Ruegg's (2002: 33, n. 23) understanding of the objection is not immediate-
ly clear to me. He translates, “But still (athâpi ci ste yang) the fault (doșa; not in
Tib.) of contradiction within the [Sāmkhya opponent's] inference on his own account
(svatas: rang gi rjes su dpag pa) has necessarily to be pointed out (udbhāvanīya =
brjod par bya ba) [by Buddhapālita],” adding in note that "the translation 'within
his inference [consisting in postulating origination] “from self”” would seem to be
less pertinent." The contradiction to be brought out is of course not within the
inference presented by the Madhyamika, but in regard to another thesis the Sānkhya
holds, i.e., the thesis of arising from self.76
[We reply:] That [fault of the Sānkhya's thesis being contradicted by
an inference] has also definitely been brought out by the Master
Buddhapalita, ¹64 [and this] by virtue of [his] statement "Things do not
arise from self because their arising would be pointless" (na svata
utpadyante bhāvās tadutpādavaiyarthyāt). For in this [statement],
with [the use of] this [word] "their" (tat) there is reference to
something [already] existing by [its] own nature. To explain,165 this is
TRANSLATION
164 PSP Tib adds ji ltar zhe na, which is followed by gang gi phyir des ni 'di skad du
bshad pa yin te. De La Vallée Poussin (PSP₁ 20.1) conjectures katham iti cet for ji
ltar zhe na and adds this, within brackets, to his edition; he does not include a
Sanskrit equivalent for gang gi phyir des ni 'di skad du bshad pa yin te. The question
and answer phrases do not appear in ms P or in the other paper manuscripts (iti
vacanāt is translated with zhes bshad pa'i phyir) but Sanskrit equivalents for both are
attested in ms Q, which reads katham kṛtvā yasmād evam tenoktam. However, these
phrases appear only in Q's lower margin and are marked as needing to be inserted
(the point of insertion is marked with an “x” before na svata). It is unlikely that the
text is original, primarily because yasmād evam tenoktam combined with na svata
utpadyante bhāvās tadutpādavaiyarthyād iti vacanāt is awkward, and creates a
certain redundancy in the text (I expect it is for this reason that de La Vallée Poussin
refrained from reconstructing an equivalent for yasmād evam tenoktam). It is more
likely that Q's katham kṛtvā yasmād evam tenoktam represents an accretion. In order
for this question and answer to appear in the Tibetan translation, it must have been
added to a manuscript in the y line prior to the translation (see Stemma; I posit the
source as ms 8). Its location in Q's margin would indicate that it was not appro-
priated by ms n when n's scribe took over some of 8's readings—since if it had been,
one would expect it to appear in Q's main text—and was instead, in a second wave of
contamination, passed directly to Q by ms 0. The question and answer were probably
originally written as a marginal note, added in the course of teaching or reading to
clarify Candrakīrti's concisely formed sentence. This marginal note would have been
brought into the main text of a later manuscript and must have appeared in one or
both of manuscripts used for the Tibetan translation. In being appropriated from the
text of ms 0 for insertion into Q, the question and answer once again appear as
marginal; enclosed between "x"s and followed by the line number to which they
belong, they give the misleading impression that they are merely words that were
dropped by Q's scribe but later caught by him or his proofreader.
165 PSP Tib adds a preceding ci'i phyir zhe na, an equivalent of which is not attested
in ms P or in the paper manuscripts; de La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 20.3) adds to his
text, in brackets, the conjecture kasmād iti cet. A Sanskrit equivalent does appear in
ms Q, namely, kim kāraṇam. However, as in the case described in the preceding note,
the words kim kāraṇam, followed by the akṣara ta, have been written in the lower
margin and are marked for insertion; the “x” after parāmarśaḥ marking the point of77
,9166
the explanatory statement (vivaraṇavākya) [subsequently given by
Buddhapalita] for that concise statement (grahaṇakavākya): "For
there is no purpose in the re-arising of things [already] existing by
[their] own nature. And with this [explanatory] statement [of
Buddhapālita’s], there is the appropriation of an example based on
similarity of properties (sādharmyadṛṣṭānta) that is acknowledged by
the opponent [alone] (paraprasiddha), [i.e., an example] with the
property to be proved (sādhyadharma) and the proving property
(sādhanadharma). There [in the concise statement under con-
sideration], through [the implied use of] this [phrase pointed out as
meant by tat and appearing in the plural in the explanatory statement
just adduced, i.e.,] "of something [already] existing by [its] own
nature" (svātmanā vidyamānasya), there is reference to the reason
(hetu); [and] through [the use of] this [phrase, namely,] "because
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
insertion appears to have been written over an erased akṣara whose remaining vague
outline could be considered that of a sta. It is difficult to explain the loss of kim
kāraṇam from P and the paper manuscripts on paleographical grounds, and the
question kim kāraṇam seems unnecessary, given that the next sentence begins with
tathā hi. As in the previous instance, it can be concluded that we are dealing with an
accretion, probably originally a marginal teaching/reading aid, which entered the y
line (see Stemma) and was passed on to the Tibetan translation, and later to Q via ms
0.
M
L
166 The explanatory statement is found at BPed 10.14-15: 'di ltar dngos po bdag gi
bdag nyid du yod pa rnams la yang skye ba dgos pa med. PsP Skt here, in contrast to
the Skt for the same statement at PsP §22 (PSP₁ 14.2), does not attest the words
padārthānām and asti.
Stcherbatsky (1927: 99, n. 2) corrects de La Vallée Poussin's conjecture [sam]grahe-
ṇ[okta]vākyaᵒ to grahaṇakavākya°, explaining, “What a grahaṇakavākyam is appears
clearly from Tātparyaṭīkā, p. 145.16 and an overwhelming multitude of similar
phrasing in all Nyāya literature. The argument is first stated laconically (grahaṇaka)
and then developed (vivaraṇa)." More precisely, a grahaṇakavākya is a short,
concise statement in nominal style and the vivaraṇavākya (vi√vṛ: “uncovering,
spreading out, unfolding”) is the prose explanation of the statement in verbal style,
with pronouns explained and compounds analyzed. Here in the PsP, tadutpāda-
vaiyarthyāt is dissolved as a compound; the ablative is represented with hi,
vaiyarthya is explained with na prayojanam, utpāda is placed in the locative case and
its meaning clarified with punar, and tat is explained with svātmanā vidyamānānām.78
TRANSLATION
arising would be pointless" (utpādavaiyarthyāt), there is reference to
the property to be proved (sādhya). 167
In this context, just as [in the stock five-membered inference, viz.,]
[thesis (pratijñā):] Sound is impermanent
[reason (hetu):] because it is produced¹68
[example (dṛṣṭānta):] whatever is produced is observed to be
impermanent, like a pot
[application (upanaya):] and similarly, sound is produced
[conclusion (nigamana):] therefore, because [it] is produced,
[sound] is impermanent,
"produced" (kṛtakatva) is here the reason (hetu) that is made evident
[as a property of the subject "sound"] by means of the application
(upanaya),¹
169
167 Candrakīrti demonstrates that when Buddhapalita states his explicit prasanga
statement, it should be understood that a complete and logically correct inference is
implicitly expressed; the elements of this inference claimed by Bhāviveka not to have
been stated, i.e., the reason and example, are, according to Candrakīrti, contained
within the prasanga's reason tadutpādavaiyarthyāt. Cp. Bhāviveka's description of
the extraction of a reason and example for MMK I.1 (see n. 138). Note that whereas
the example referred to by Candrakīrti is paraprasiddha, generally established for the
opponent, i.e., acknowledged by the opponent alone, the one Bhāviveka elicits for the
inferential formulation of MMK I.1 is prasiddha, i.e., generally established for both
parties in the debate, common knowledge for both parties in the debate, i.e.,
generally acknowledged by both parties in the debate (see PPT's detailed explanation
of the example for Bhāviveka's inference at D 62b7-63b4; P 72b4-73a5).
168 PSP Tib reads byas pa mi rtag pa'i phyir ro, for which de La Vallée Poussin (PSP₁
20, n. 6) reconstructs kṛtakānityatvāt, but he does not include this in the text of his
edition. Ms Q presents kṛtakatvānityatvāt, a reading that has to be rejected because
kṛtakatvāt is considered as the reason in the rest of the inference (ms Q attests
kṛtakam, kṛtakaḥ, kṛtakatvāt and kṛtakatvam in what follows in PSPM §29 [PSP₁ 20.7-
8]). Ms P has a lacuna at this point but the main paper manuscripts all give the reason
as kṛtakatvāt. Ms Q's reading has entered from the y line (see Stemma), probably
received over ms n from ms 8.
169 PSP Tib construes the sentence kṛtakatvam atropanayābhivyakto hetuḥ as 'dir nye
bar sbyar bas gsal bar byas pa'i byas pa gtan tshigs yin pa: “Here 'produced,' which
is made evident by the application, is the reason" (cf. de La Vallée Poussin'sPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
79
-so in the present case too (ihāpi), [i.e., in the inference implicit in
Buddhapalita's slightly expanded concise statement]: "Things do not
arise from self because the re-arising of things [already] existing by
[their] own nature is pointless," [the reason is shown by the applica-
tion]. 170
Here, [the inference implied by Buddhapālita's statement is:] [A
thing] such as a pot that is [already] existing by own nature, which is
situated in front [of one], is observed not to require re-arising. And
similarly (tathā ca),¹7¹ if you think that [things such as] a pot, etc., are
171
observation at PSP₁ 20, n. 7: “D'aprés Tib. °vyaktam"). PsP Skt, with atra separating
the subject and predicate, is correct, for it is not kṛtakatva as such that is made
evident by the application, but kṛtakatva as the reason (hetu), i.e., the reason is
brought out by the application, and in this case the reason brought out is kṛtakatva.
The application (upanaya) confirms the connection of the reason with the specific
subject of the inference, i.e., it confirms the reason's being a property of the subject,
and thus, with the conclusion (nigamana), its proving of the thesis. See, e.g.,
Junankar 1978: 258f. Candrakīrti wishes to emphasize that the reason he extracts
from Buddhapālita's prasanga statement, like other reasons of correct five-
membered inferences, is specifically confirmed as a property of the subject with the
application step. Cp. NM kārikā 4d = PS III.15d: hetus tūpanayān mataḥ (cf. Tucci
1930: 21; Katsura 1978: 119; Katsura 2009: 158).
17⁰ Before presenting the inference he claims is already present in Buddhapālita’s
concise statement, i.e., in his prasanga statement, Candrakīrti makes explicit the
elements "arising” (utpāda), and “their” (tat) with the help of the explanatory
statement: "arising" is expanded to "re-arising" (punarutpāda), and "their" is
expanded to "of things [already] existing by [their] own nature” (svātmanā vidya-
mānānām); from the latter he derives the reason "because [they already] exist"
(vidyamānatvāt) and the example for the inference. Hopkins (1983: 484) translates
this statement as part of the inference (similarly Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 34), although in
his discussion of the parts of the inference (cf. Hopkins: 481-483) he does not appear
to understand it as such.
171 Stcherbatsky (1927: 100, n. 2) states that na tu would be preferable to tathā ca,
"but ‘tathā ca' is also possible, since a vaidharmyadṛṣṭānta is also sometimes
introduced in this way." However, things such as a non-manifest pot and so forth do
not qualify as a vaidharmyadṛṣṭānta but are rather the subject for Buddhapālita’s
alleged inference. Stcherbatsky (ibid., 100) has misunderstood the structure of the
Sanskrit sentence and therefore breaks it into two contrasting sentences (in the note
in which he comments on tathā ca, he also asserts that a daṇḍa has to be inserted
after avasthāyām): “The jar in its (potential) condition in a clump of clay is an
example (by contrast), (since it needs to be really produced). But if you mean the jar
which already exists by itself, such a jar is not produced (once more)." In doing so he80
172
also [already] existing by own nature at the stage of a lump of clay,
in this case as well those [pots, etc., inasmuch as they already]
exist by own nature, do not arise.¹
etc.,
173
TRANSLATION
harms the expression of both the upanaya and the nigamana of the proof that
Candrakīrti is showing to be implicit in Buddhapālita's prasanga statement.
172 ādi ("etc.") of mṛtpiṇḍādi refers to all other pre-arising states of things, i.e., to the
various individual causes in which the Sankhya asserts the pre-existence of the effect.
173 After demonstrating how he derives the elements of the other-acknowledged
inference from Buddhapālita's statement and after repeating Buddhapalita's partially
expanded concise statement, Candrakīrti sets forth the proof, i.e., the other-
acknowledged inference. “[A thing] such as a pot that is [already] existing by own
nature, which is situated in front” (svātmanā vidyamānaṁ puro 'vasthitam ghaṭādi-
kam) is the example based on similarity of properties (sādharmyadṛṣṭānta), which is
acknowledged solely by the opponent; this example “[a thing] such as a pot that is
[already] existing by own nature, which is situated in front" possesses the property to
be proved, i.e., the probandum (sādhya) “not requiring re-arising” (punarutpādāna-
pekṣa), a re-phrasing of utpādavaiyarthya, the probandum extracted from the reason
in Buddhapālita's prasanga statement, and possesses the proving property, i.e., the
probans (hetu), "[already] existing by own nature” (svātmanā vidyamānam), likewise
extracted from the reason in Buddhapālita's prasanga statement. The five-limbed
proof, expressed formally, therefore would be (the reference to the subject as "things
disposed to arise" [utpitsupadārtha] is taken from Candrakīrti's comments on the
subject at PSPM §31 [PSP₁ 22.1-2]):
[thesis:] [Things disposed to arise (utpitsupadārtha) such as] a pot, etc., at the stage
of a lump of clay, etc., do not require re-arising,
[reason:] because they [already] exist by own nature (vidyamānatvāt);
[example:] that which [already] exists by [its] own nature is observed not to require
re-arising (punarutpādānapekṣa), like [a thing] such as a pot situated in front, which
is [already] existing;
[application:] and similarly, [things disposed to arise such as] a pot, etc., at the stage
of a lump of clay, etc., [already] exist by own nature;
[conclusion:] therefore, because they [already] exist by own nature, [things disposed
to arise, such as] a pot, etc., at the stage of a lump of clay, etc., do not require re-
arising.
Candrakīrti expresses the upanaya and the nigamana in the form of a prose sentence
in which the reason, here specifically applied to a pot, etc., at the stage of a lump of
clay, etc., is explicitly shown to be accepted by the Sānkhya (mṛtpiṇḍādyavasthāyām
api yadi svātmanā vidyamānam iti manyase); this reason is intentionally repeated
in the concluding part of the sentence to underscore its being, from the point of view
of the opponent, a property of the logical subject. See also della Santina's (1986:
144f.) résumé of the passage.
The thesis of the other-acknowledged inference conflicts with another thesis the
Sankhya propounds, namely, that things arise from self. The Sankhya will have to81
Thus, the bringing out for the Sankhya of the [fact that his thesis is in]
contradiction with an inference (anumanavirodha) that is [accepted]
just from [his] own [point of view] has definitely been effected by
"[already] existing by own nature," the reason (hetu) shown by the
application, which does not deviate (avyabhicarin) from [the pro-
bandum, i.e.,] the negation of re-arising. Why, then, has [Bhāviveka]
voiced [this critique:] "That [mode of argumentation of Buddha-
palita's] is not suitable, because a reason and an example have not
been stated"?
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§30. And not only is there not [the defect of] not stating a reason and
an example, there is also not [the other defect Bhāviveka accuses
Buddhapalita of, namely, that] the faults pronounced by the opponent
have not been refuted. Why [not]? For the Sankhyas certainly do not
claim that there is the re-manifestation (punarabhivyakti) of a pot that
has a manifest form, [i.e., one] situated in front; and [thus] this very
[pot in front] is employed here [in the inference] as the example
because [it] has an established form (siddharupa) [and as such it is
accepted by the Sankhyas as something that does not require further
arising].174 And because something that has a non-manifest form, that
has assumed a potential form (śaktirūpa), is to be proved as qualified
by the negation of arising, how can there be [any] suspicion of the
fault that the proposition is proving that which is [already] established
(siddhasādhana) [for the opponent], or how can it be suspected that
accept this inference that proves that things do not arise from self because he
certainly does not hold that things such as the clay water pots he sees before his eyes
come into being once more; in order to avoid self-contradiction he will be forced to
relinquish his thesis of self-arising. For a breakdown of the structure of the larger
section, see MacDonald 2003: 173f.
174 PSP Tib lacks an equivalent for upādāna: de nyid 'dir dpe nyid du grub pa'i ngo
bo yin pa’i phyir la, “... because here just that [manifest pot] is something whose
form is established as the example." When the sentence is construed in this way, the
forms siddharūpa and anabhivyaktarūpa do not form a contrasting pair, as they do in
Sanskrit; in PSP Tib the first would be used in an epistemological sense, the second
in an ontological sense. I am unable to explain how upādānam came to be dropped.
Hopkins (1983: 485), overlooking the first nyid and interpreting ngo bo as “entity”
(bhāva), translates, “... and [thus] here it is an entity established as an example [of
something which already exists in its own entity and is not produced again]."
6682
the reason is contradictory (viruddhārthatā)?¹75 Therefore, even when
[we accede to Bhāviveka's demand and] there is criticism (codanā)
that there is sublation [of the Sānkhya thesis] by way of an inference
(anumānabādhā) from [the Sānkhya's] own point of view,¹76 since the
TRANSLATION
175
In the PP, Bhāviveka, upon employing his inference proving the non-arising of the
inner bases from self, is accused by the Sānkhya, first, of proving what is already
established for the Sankhya if he assumes "from self" to mean "from something
having the nature of an effect," and second, of having a contradictory reason, that is,
of proving the opposite of what he intends to prove, if he assumes "from self" to
mean "from something having the nature of a cause" (cf. PP D 49a4; P 58b4-5).
Bhāviveka responds to the critique by saying that he simply negates arising as such,
i.e., arising without any specification (bdag las skye ba tsam dgag pa'i phyir [PP D
49a5; P 58b5; for PPT references, see Ames 1993: 243, n. 97]), and that even if
arising from self is considered to mean arising from something having the nature of a
cause, his inference remains without fault, for he rejects arising from a cause that is
the same as or different from its effect (rgyu'i bdag nyid las na yang bdag dang
gzhan du gyur pa las kyang skye ba sel ba'i phyir [PP D 49a5; P 58b5-6]). Bhāvi-
veka, in faulting Buddhapālita's employment of a prasanga statement, re-directs this
very same Sankhya critique toward his fellow Madhyamika, saying that Buddhapālita
has not articulated his own response to this expected Sankhya rebuke. Candrakīrti,
defending Buddhapālita, has earlier (see PSPM §25 and §27 [PSP₁ 16.2, 16.11]),
declared that the (true) Mādhyamika does not state an independent inference (sva-
tantrānumāna); thus for the Madhyamika who is not encumbered by an independent
proposition like Bhāviveka's paramārthato nādhyātmikāny āyatanāni svata utpannā-
ni or a reason like his vidyamānatvāt, there exists no basis for the Sankhya's charges
of siddhasādhana and viruddhārthatā. In his extended defense of Buddhapālita in
which he claims that an inference is couched in the prasanga statement, Candrakīrti
has now set forth an inference replete with all its members that indeed, even though it
is an inference whose members are accepted as established only by the Sānkhya,
could be open to a similar Sāṁkhya attack. Candrakīrti thus presents his defense
against the Sānkhya critique: First, there is not the proving of what is already
established for the Sānkhya, namely, that manifest things do not arise again, because
manifest effects only qualify as the example, and not the subject; the subject
comprises the things the Sānkhya maintains only exist in a potential form, and which
he claims require arising. Second, there is not the proving of the opposite of that
which the Madhyamika intends to prove, that is, there is not the proving that things
that are claimed to exist as their causes do require re-arising, because the reason, as a
property of the locus (pakṣa) and of the example, proves the proposition, i.e., that
things in a non-manifest but existing form do not require re-arising.
176 Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 35) translates svato 'numānabādhācodanāyām api as "also
in [Buddhapālita’s restrictive] specification relating to the invalidation of the infer-
ence on [the Samkhya's] own account." It is of course the Sankhya's original thesis83
faults as described do not exist [for this inference drawn out of
Buddhapalita's consequence (prasanga)], there is definitely not [the
defect that] the faults pronounced by the opponent have not been
refuted; it should thus be known that this critique (dūṣaṇa)¹77 [as
stated by Bhāviveka] is absolutely incoherent. ¹78
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§31. And because with the word "etc." (ādi) in [the subject] "a pot,
etc." (ghaṭādika) the inclusion of all things that are disposed to arise
(utpitsupadārtha) is intended, there is also definitely not inconclu-
siveness (anaikāntikatā) [of the reason] by way of [cases of] cloth,
179
etc.
of arising from self that is sublated by the other-acknowledged inference inherent in
Buddhapalita's statement (see n. 173).
177 PSP Tib, with sun 'byin pa 'di dag for etad dūṣanam, appears to understand
dūṣaṇa as relating back either to the first two faults stated by Bhāviveka or to the
two-fold Sankhya critique. The Sanskrit would appear to refer only to the second
fault stated by Bhāviveka.
178 Candrakīrti's dismissal of this objection of Bhāviveka’s as “incoherent" (asamba-
ddha) may in part be meant as a jab in kind at Bhāviveka's criticism of Buddha-
palita's reason in his prasanga refuting arising from other as "incoherent" (cf. PP D
50a7; P 60b1).
17⁹ Since the subject includes without exception all things that are inclined to arise, a
counter-example such as a hypothetical case of cloth that exists in potential form and
yet requires re-arising cannot be found, and thus cannot be used by the opponent to
show that the reason does not exclusively prove that things do not require re-arising.
Hopkins (1983: 486), relying on 'Jam dbyangs bzhad pa's interpretation of the
section, also understands ghaṭādika of this passage to refer to the subject (see also
ibid., n. 398). Della Santina (1986: 146f.), on the other hand, presenting bSod nams
Sen ge's interpretation of the passage, takes ghaṭādika to refer to the example: “This
objection, however, is without foundation because when the example was presented,
it was said, ‘a jar and the like.' The phrase, ‘and the like’, indicates the inclusion of
all entities without exception which may be thought to originate." Candrakīrti has not
without reason included the desiderative utpitsu(padārtha) in the phrase niravase-
şotpitsupadārthasangrahasya vivakṣitatvāt. He purposely employs it to indicate that
he is referring to the subject, the things that the Sāṁkhya maintains exist in a potential
state and which are spoken about as such because they are inclined to, ready to, keen
to, arise, i.e., they are things that will arise and in their manifest forms constitute the
things of the world. Candrakīrti wants to preempt the Sānkhya objection that
according to them another group of things, i.e., things other than pots, do require re-
arising. With all things declared as embraced by the subject, it is precluded that cloth,
etc., in non-manifest form can constitute counter-examples where the reason is84
§32. Alternatively, this is another way of formulating (prayogamārga)
[an other-acknowledged inference]: 180 "For the [Sankhya] who claims
arising from self (svata utpattivādin), things different from
Purușa just on account of that (tata eva) [claim of self-arising]—do
not arise from self, because [they already] exist by own nature, like
Purusa." This is to be adduced as the example [in this case].181
TRANSLATION
present, and that cloth, etc., can have the property opposite to the one to be proved (=
anaikāntikatā of the reason). *LȚ's author mistakenly takes ghaṭādika to be referring
to the example: ghato dṛṣṭāntīkṛto (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 122 [fol. 2a1]). Yonezawa's
(ibid., 134) emendation of PsP₁'s paṭādibhir to ghaṭādibhir on the basis of *LT's
reading ghaṭādir is not acceptable.
In the PP, an opponent states that the reason vidyamānatvāt adduced by Bhāviveka
for MMK I.1 has not been shown to be absent from dissimilar cases, and thus is
inadmissible as a reason; Bhāviveka replies that because there is not a dissimilar
case, i.e., some thing that already exists and then arises from self, there is no fault in
either this or any other such inference (cf. PP D 49a3; P 58b2-3; see also Lindtner
1986: 63). Candrakīrti does not include such an objection but he may, through his use
of the comprehensive subject ghaṭādika, also be intending to show, in a slightly more
sophisticated way, that no dissimilar cases exist and in this way avoid a charge like
that made by the PP opponent.
180 PSP Tib has a different emphasis: yang na sbyor ba 'di ni tshul gzhan yin te
"Alternatively, this application/inference is a different sort" (Skt: atha vāyam anyaḥ
prayogamargaḥ).
L
181 This second other-acknowledged inference is in the Dignāgean style of thesis,
reason and example. De La Vallée Poussin expresses hesitancy to retain tata eva
(PSP₁ 22, n. 4), especially because these two words are lacking in PsP Tib. They are,
however, attested in ms P and ms Q (ms Q's tata erroneously reads tatra) as well as
in the paper manuscripts, and sense can definitely be derived from them, viz., things
cannot be held to arise precisely because of the doctrinal point that they arise from
themselves (according to the Buddhist critique of the theory: from already existent
selves). See the translation of the same passage in Tillemans 1992: 317. Seyfort
Ruegg (2002: 37) translates following PsP Tib. *LȚ's author glosses purușa with
ātmā and paraphrases tata eva with svarūpād eva; he specifies anya of the
introductory phrase as follows: anya iti | pūrvaprayogāt buddhapālitasyaivāpara ity
arthaḥ (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 122, 134 [fol. 2a2]).
The example in this second inference is similar to that given by Bhāviveka in his
inference for MMK I.1. Bhāviveka, however, employs caitanya, the own nature of
puruṣa (instead of purușa) as the example because, according to Avalokitavrata, this
example is acknowledged by both the Sankhya and the Mādhyamika, for the
Madhyamika acknowledges the surface-level existence of consciousness (skabs 'dir
ni dper na chos can shes pa yod pa nyid ces bya ba de rgol ba’i phyogs la ni shes paPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
85
§33. And even if the proponent of manifestation (abhivyaktivādin)
[i.e., the Sankhya] does not [consider our] negation of arising (utpā-
dapratiṣedha) to sublate [his thesis of arising from self], still, [due to
the fact that we] employ¹82 the word "arising" in the sense of
manifestation given that precisely manifestation is expressed with
the word "arising" inasmuch as there is similarity in properties [in the
case of the arising of a thing and that of the manifestation of a thing]
with respect to [the thing's] prior non-perception and later
perception this negation [of ours] does not fail to sublate. ¹83
yod pa nyid ces bya ba yod pa nyid du grags la | phyir rgol ba'i phyogs la ni kun
rdzob tu rnam par shes pa nyid ces bya bar yod pa nyid du grags pa de la bsgrub bar
bya ba chos bdag las skye ba med pa zhes bya ba rgol ba dang phyir rgol ba gnyi ga
[P: gnyis ka] la grags pa [PPT D 68a4-5; P 79a4-5]).
182
*LT's author glosses nipātya with niyojya (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 122, 134 [fol.
2a2]).
183
I follow Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 37) in translating nābādhakaḥ (lit.: “is not a non-
sublater") as "does not fail to sublate." According to Candrakīrti, the Sankhya may
object that the word "arising," which implies the coming into being of something
new and different from its cause, cannot be equated with the manifestation he
propounds, namely, the manifestation of effects that represent merely a modification
of the subtle causal matter prakṛti, and may therefore reject that the Madhyamaka
negation of arising has any bearing on his theory. Although Candrakīrti argues that
arising and manifestation have similar properties, it has to be admitted that the
Madhyamikas ignore the complexities of the theory of manifestation for the sake of
refuting it. A more forceful objection from the Sānkhya side is presented in the PP
immediately following Bhāviveka's critique of Buddhapālita's prasanga statement:
the Sankhya rejects the Buddhist refutation of his view on the ground that the
portrayal of the Sāṁkhya doctrine of manifestation from potentiality as a doctrine
positing "things arising from themselves" grossly misrepresents the doctrine (gzhan
dag na re dngos po rnams bdag las skye ba med pa zhes bya ba de rigs pa ma yin te |
phyogs snga ma rang dgar sbyar ba la sel ba'i phyir | [P: phyir ro ||] ri bong gi rwa
las ’jig rten gsum skye ba sel ba bzhin no zhes zer ro || [PP D 49b1, P 59a2-3; see also
PPT D 75b4-7, P 88b2-6; Kajiyama 1963: 50; Ames 1993: 223]). Bhāviveka
responds by saying that potentiality (śakti) and the manifest (vyakta) do not have
different natures, and thus arising from potentiality is equivalent to "arising from
self" (PP D 49b1-2; P 59a3-4). He adds that even if the position (phyogs) [of "arising
from self"] has been made up, there is no fault because it has been included for the
sake of showing that arising is not logically justifiable (PP D 49b2; P 59a4-5; D reads
phyogs rnams). Ames (1993: 244, n. 107) explains, “Even if no one holds that entities
originate from themselves, it is legitimate to refute that position in order to negate
every conceivable way in which things might originate” (Ames refers to PPT P 90a1-86
§34. If [it is asked]: But how is this meaning as you have expressed it
obtained without [Buddhapālita] at all articulating such reflections
(vicāra)?, then [we] reply: These [sentences of Buddhapālita's] are of
course statements of meaning (arthavākyāni) [which,] possessing
great import,¹84 have the [entire] meaning as stated [by myself,
Candrakīrti] included [within them]. And these [same statements,]
being explained, yield the essential meaning (arthātmānam) just as [I
have] asserted [it]. Therefore, nothing is postulated here that was not
[already] assumed [by Buddhapalita].
TRANSLATION
§35. And connection with a meaning that is the reverse of the
consequence (prasangaviparīta) [results] only for the [Sankhya]
opponent, not for us, because there is no thesis [from our] own [side]
(svapratijñā); and on account of this, contradiction with [our own]
6, D 76b7-77a3). See also Bhāviveka's reply to the Sankhya who concedes that
things do not arise but argues that they nevertheless manifest (... de ma skyes pa ni
bden mod kyi | 'on kyang gsal bar byed do || [PP D 52b7; P 63b6]); see D 52b7-53a5;
P 63b6-64a4; Kajiyama 1963: 61f.; Ames 1993: 233f.
184 De La Vallée Poussin (PSP, 23, n. 1) reconstructs Tib's don gyi ngag 'di dag ni
don chen po can yin pas as ... tāni mahārthatvād yathoditam but I do not think that
an ablative or other causal construction has to be assumed for the Sanskrit exemplars
used for the translation, for it is not uncommon for nominal attributes to bear or to be
understood as bearing causal meaning and to be translated with that meaning made
explicit.
The arthavākyas are Buddhapālita's statements, viz., his prasanga statement and its
expanded version in verbal style, that he uses to argue for MMK I.1's declaration that
things do not arise from self. These weighty statements of Buddhapālita's are deemed
by Candrakīrti to be pregnant with meaning: the full inference exists in a condensed
manner within them, and is easily delivered upon proper identification of its reason,
etc. *LŢ's author states that the person asking the question how Candrakīrti obtains
the inferences when they have not been explicitly stated does so because he is con-
fused (samkīrṇatvād [ms: samkīrttatvād] ity āha); cf. Yonezawa 2004: 122, 135 [fol.
2a2]. Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 37f.) assumes that the preceding discussion regarding
arising vs. manifestation is still relevant (“How has such an investigation (vicāra =
rnam par dpyod pa) been achieved (labhyate rñed) without the aforementioned
sense [of manifestation rather than that of origination] being expressed ... [by the
Madhyamika]?") but this was concluded in the preceding paragraph.
Kevin Vose informs me that Pa tshab, in his Tshig gsal ba’i dka’ ba bshad pa / bla ma
tshong dpon pan di ta’i gdam ngag (bKa’ gdams gsung 'bum, vol. 11, 150.i.8), notes
that the reading “in a certain Kashmiri manuscript" is 'phags pa'i ngag, that is,
āryavākyāni, but prefers and subsequently explains the reading arthavākyāni.
=PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
tenets (siddhāntavirodha) is not possible.¹85 But we do indeed
welcome the fact that many faults befall the opponent through
incurring the reverse of the consequence. How [could] the Master
Buddhapalita, who follows the doctrine of the Master Nāgārjuna in a
non-mistaken way, possibly assert a statement that affords an op-
portunity (sāvakāśavacana) [for criticism] ¹87 so that his opponent
obtains an opportunity [to point out faults]? And when the proponent
of [the doctrine that] things [are] without own-being (niḥsvabhāva-
bhāvavādin) adduces a consequence ¹88 for the proponent of [the doc-
trine that] things have own-being (sasvabhāvabhāvavādin), how
[could] a meaning that is the reverse of [this] consequence entail [for
the one merely pointing out the consequence]? For words do not
deprive the speaker of [his] independence the way those armed with
87
186
185 Candrakīrti argues that the Sānkhya will be forced to relinquish his position of
arising from self and will, as a consequence, in order to defend the arising of real
things, end up with the position of arising from other (Candrakīrti has earlier stated
the reverse of the consequence as parasmād utpannā bhāvā janmasāphalyāt janma-
nirodhāc ca; see also n. 124). See also della Santina 1986: 150; Hopkins' sources
have understood the reverse of the consequence somewhat differently; on this latter
dGe lugs pa interpretation see also Tillemans 1992, especially 323.
PSP Tib presents the last part of the sentence as a rhetorical question: "Therefore,
how does there exist for us contradiction with [our] tenets?”: de'i phyir kho bo cag la
grub pa'i mtha' dang 'gal ba ga la yod; the paragraph in PsP Tib thus appears to
reflect three questions, instead of two, all introduced with kutaḥ. One of the
translators' Sanskrit manuscripts of the PsP may have attested a third rhetorical
question, or the translators may have been confronted with a scribal error such as
tataś ca siddhāntavirodhasambhavaḥ and added kho ba cag la and ga la to correct it.
Alternatively, they may have met with the reading attested in our manuscripts but
chose to follow Candrakīrti's earlier interrogative style in order to draw attention to
the fact that another of Bhāviveka's accusations is being addressed (cp. PsPM §29,
end [PSP₁ 21.7]: tat kim ucyate tad ayuktam hetudṛṣṭāntānabhidhānād iti; PSPM §30
[PSP₁ 21.11f.]: kutaḥ siddhasādhanapakṣadoṣāśankā kuto vā hetor viruddhārtha-
tāśanketi). See also the translations of the sentence in Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 38f.,
Yotsuya 1999: 44, n. 56 and Tillemans 1992: 319.
186
I understand aviparīta as intended adverbially. PsP Tib takes it as modifying mata
("the unmistaken doctrine"): slob dpon klu sgrub kyi lugs phyin ci ma log pa’i rjes su
'brang ba slob dpon sangs rgyas bskyangs.
187 Note that Candrakīrti employs the PP's *sāvakāśavacana at this point. See n. 123.
188 prasanga āpādyamāne lit. "when a consequence is being caused to be incurred."88
sticks and rope (dāṇḍapāśika)¹89 do. On the contrary, when they
possess [semantic] capacity (śakti) they conform to the intention of
the speaker. And therefore, because the adducing of the [undesired]
consequence has as [its] result the mere negation (pratiṣedhamātra)
of the opponent's thesis, [the Madhyamika] does not incur the reverse
of the consequence.
190
TRANSLATION
§36. And in the same way, [in the Madhyamakaśāstra] the Master
[Nāgārjuna] as a general rule (bhūyasā) refuted the proposition of the
opponent (parapakṣa) exclusively by way of [the opponent's] in-
curring of consequences [with statements such as]:
There is not any space (ākāśa) prior to the characteristic
(laksana) of space.
It would follow that it would be without characteristic (alaksana)
if it existed prior to [its] characteristic."
191
189 The dictionaries give a variety of meanings for dāṇḍapāśika/daṇḍapāśaka: PW:
"der die Schlinge der Strafe führt, Richter, Polizeimeister”; Apte: “1) a head police
officer 2) a hangman, an executioner"; MW: "a policeman"; de La Vallée Poussin
(PSP₁ 24, n. 3) translates: “Veilleur de nuit." Cf. Wackernagel and Debrunner 1954:
523, for the suffix ka in the special meaning "armed with” (and for the analogous
compound daṇḍājinika, also derived from a dvandva). This would fit with the Tibet-
an translation dbyug pa dang zhags pa can. See also Tibetan interpretations of
dāṇḍapāśikas in Hopkins 1983: 493 and della Santina 1986: 151.
1⁹⁰ Cf. the translations in Seyfort Ruegg 1981: 78f. and 2002: 39f. and also Seyfort
Ruegg 2000: 252-257.
1⁹1 Candrakrīti cites MMK V.1: nākāśam vidyate kimcit pūrvam ākāśalakṣaṇāt
alakṣaṇam prasajyeta syāt pūrvam yadi lakṣaṇāt ||. Translated in, e.g., Schayer 1931:
2; cf. Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 42; Stcherbatsky 1927: 104; Ames 1999: 75-77. The
Sarvāstivādins distinguish two types of ākāśa, the first, unconditioned (asamskṛta)
and immaterial space which has the own nature of not hindering, that is, the empty
space within which material objects can exist and move (AKBhed 3.23: anāvaraṇa-
svabhāvam ākāśam yatra rūpasya gatiḥ; the Vātsīputrīyas and Sammatīyas, schools
with which Nāgārjuna may have had early connections, deny ākāśa the status of an
asamskṛtadharma); the second, the conditioned (samskṛta) and material dhātu ākāśa
as the free space between material objects that is dark or light and is exemplified by
the empty space of a door, of a window, or of the mouth or the nostrils (AK I.28ab:
chidram ākāśadhātvākhyam ālokatamasī kila; AKBhed 18.11-17: tat kim ākāśam
evākāśadhātur veditavyaḥ nety āha | kim tarhi | dvāravātāyanamukhanāsikādiṣu
[AK I.28a:] chidram ākāśadhātvākhyam ... [AK I.28b:] ālokatamasī kila | ... tasmāt
kilākāśadhātur ālokatamaḥsvabhāvo rātrimdivasvabhāvo veditavyaḥ |) and that asPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
89
If matter (rūpa) is separate from the cause of matter, it follows
that matter is without a cause (hetu),
But there does not exist any thing anywhere without a cause.
Similarly,
nirvāṇa, to start, is not a thing (bhāva); [if it were a thing] it
would follow that it would be characterized by old age and death,
For there is nothing without old age and death.1⁹3
192
§37. If, because they are statements of meaning (arthavākya), the
Master [Nāgārjuna]'s statements are considered [by Bhāviveka]—
such belongs to the rūpaskandha as a type of visible matter. According to the
Sarvāstivādins, both types of space exist; for arguments for ākāśa as an existent
thing, see Dhammajoti 2009: 491-496. According to the Sautrāntikas, ākāśa as a
dhātu (and as an asamskṛtadharma [AKBhed 92.5-6]) is not a real thing (vastu;
dravya) but is simply the absence of material resistance (AKVy 57.13-14: svamatam
tu sapratighadravyābhāvamātram ākāśam iti abhiprāyo lakṣyate). It is clear that the
ākāśa which Nāgārjuna takes up in the fifth chapter of the MMK as representative of
the dhātus was claimed to be a real thing, and one expects that he was refuting ākāśa
as conceived materialistically in the Sarvāstivādin or another related school.
Buddhapālita, Bhāviveka and Candrakīrti must have been aware of the materialistic
determination of ākāśa, yet nevertheless present as its characteristic the AKBh-
attested lakṣaṇa for asaṁskṛtākāśa, namely, anāvaraṇa. However, Samghabhadra
does state that both the asamskṛtākāśa and the dhātu ākāśa are non-obstructive; their
difference in this respect lies in the fact that the dhātu ākāśa is capable of being
obstructed whereas asamskṛtākāśa is not obstructed by other things (see Dhammajoti
2009: 496). The *Abhidharmamahāvibhāṣaśāstra states that the dhātu ākāśa is
sapratigha (ibid., 491). On ākāśa see also Schayer 1931: 3, n. 3; Conze 1967: 163-
166.
192
Candrakrīti cites MMK IV.2: rūpakāraṇanirmukte rūpe rūpam prasajyate | ahetu-
kam na cāsty arthaḥ kaścid āhetukaḥ kvacit || On the reading ahetukam, see the
corresponding note in PsPµ. Translated in, e.g., May 1959: 89: “Si la matière est
dégagée de la cause de matière, il suit par conséquence nécessaire qu'elle est dé-
pourvue de cause. Or, aucune chose n'existe nulle part sans cause"; Ames 1999: 54f.;
Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 42.
193 Candrakrīti cites MMK XXV.4: bhāvas tāvan na nirvāṇam jarāmaraṇalakṣaṇam |
prasajyetāsti bhāvo hi na jarāmaraṇam vinā ||. Translated in, e.g., Seyfort Ruegg:
2002: 42; Stcherbatsky 1927: 104; Wood 1994: 301; Bugault 1992: 91. The three
cited kārikās are discussed in Hopkins 1983: 494-497; della Santina 1986: 151-153.90
TRANSLATION
-194
given that they are of great import" -as the cause of numerous
inferences, why aren't also the statements of the Master Buddhapālita
considered to be just the same?
1⁹4 The sentence up to parikalpyeta, i.e., the protasis of the conditional sentence, is
based on Bhāviveka's PP commentary on MMK XVIII.1: the opponent objects that
since Nāgārjuna did not set forth the individual members of an inference his proof
has the fault of incompleteness (gal te bstan bcos mdzad pas | dam bcas pa la sogs
pa’i yan lag ma brjod pa’i phyir sgrub pa ma tshang ba’i skyon yod do zhe na), to
which Bhāviveka replies: don gyi tshig yin pa’i phyir skyon med de | 'di ltar slob dpon
gyi tshig dag ni don gyi tshig dag yin te | yi ge mdor bsdus pa dang | don rgya che ba
dag yin pas don gyi dbang gis sbyor ba’i tshig du ma dag gi gzhi yin par bzhed pa’i
phyir ro || (see D 180a1-2; P 223b7-224a2). Translated in Ames 1986: 63, “Because
[Nāgārjuna's verse] is a succinct statement (don gyi tshig, artha-vākya), there is no
fault. For the statements of the ācārya are succinct statements (artha-vākya), because
by virtue of [their] meaning (artha), they are held to be the basis of many syllogisms
(prayoga-vākya), since [their] words [literally, "syllables"] are brief but [their]
meaning is great" (the passage is referred to in Lindtner 1986: 79, n. 26; see also the
translation in Eckel 1980: 197-8 and 242, n. 13). Bhāviveka goes on to say that not
stating all the parts of an inference is a fault, but he adds that even this may not be a
fault if the parts are already known to the listeners: sbyor ba'i tshig la ni de skyon du
yang 'gyur || yang na de la yang mi 'gyur te | rab tu byed pa 'am | lung las la la la yan
lag ’ga’ zhig grags pa yin na’o ||.
De La Vallée Poussin emends his manuscripts' parikalpet to parikalpyate and
assumes Candrakīrti to be indicated as the logical subject of this verb: “Par l'auteur
de la présente Vṛtti” (PsP₁ 25, n. 2); he understands the entire sentence to be uttered
by Bhāviveka. Stcherbatsky (1927: 105) correctly understands the sentence up to de
La Vallée Poussin's parikalpyate to be Bhāviveka's: “(Bhāvaviveka). But these are
aphorisms. The sentences of our Master contain profound intentions. They can be
variously tackled and give rise to a variety of syllogistic formulation" (the word
"tackled” is noted as the translation for “parikalpyante.”). Hopkins (1983: 497 and n.
413) follows the dGe lugs pa interpretation, here specifically that of sGom sde Nam
mka' rgyal mtshan, which takes the entire sentence as one formulated by Candrakīrti
in a general sense and posed of a hypothetical Bhāviveka.
Bhāviveka sees in and extracts from Nāgārjuna's kārikās numerous inferences; the
section immediately following MMK I.1 in the PP has been referred to earlier (see n.
138). MMK V.1 just quoted by Candrakīrti as an example of a Nāgārjunian
consequence is developed by Bhāviveka into various inferences. Bhāviveka explains
that from V.1ab one may extract the thesis that space as a real substance does not
exist, that "without arising" is a property of the subject space—and thus the reason-
that is acknowledged by both sides of the debate, and that a rabbit's horn is the
example established on the basis of the probandum and probans; he presents the
inference, “Ultimately, space does not exist as a real substance, because it is without
arising, like a rabbit's horn" (rdzas su gyur pa'o zhes dam bca' ba nye bar bzhag paPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
91
§38. But if [Bhāviveka considers that] the [following] is a rule (nyāya)
for commentators, [namely,] that there has to be a detailed stating of
inferential statements (prayogavākya),
195
[we reply that] this too is not [correct], because even when the Master
Nāgārjuna composed the commentary on the Vigrahavyāvartani he
did not make inferential statements.
$39. Moreover, this logician's (tarkika) [i.e., Bhāviveka's] 1⁹6
asserting-despite [his] acceptance of the Madhyamaka view
(madhyamakadarśana) ¹⁹7 of independent inferential statements
197
tr
yin no || de skye ba med par phyogs gnyi ga la grags pa ni chos yin no || dpe ni de’i
dbang gis te | ri bong gi rwa la sogs pa dag yin no || 'dir rjes su dpag pa ni | don dam
par nam mkha' rdzas su yod pa ma yin te | skye ba med pa'i phyir dper na ri bong gi
rwa bzhin no || [PPed 476.1-6; see PP 212; Ames 1999: 75f.]). His attention shifting
to MMK V.1d (= Tib V.1c: gal te mtshan las snga gyur na), Bhāviveka states that
this pāda indicates another property of the subject space, namely, "being at a
different time" (dus tha dad pa nyid; the reason for the new inference is "because of
existing at an earlier time than that [characteristic]") on the basis of which the
example "something other than space” (de las gzhan pa) is attained; and he presents
still another inference, whose reason "because [the characteristic] is different [from
space]" he considers to be additionally indicated by MMK V.1d (cf. PPed 477.6-11;
18-23; PP 214f.; Ames 1999: 77f.).
195
Cp. PPT (on PP's statement sbyor ba’i tshig la ni de skyon du yang 'gyur [=
commentary on MMK XVIII.1]): sbyor ba tshig la ni de skyon du 'gyur ro zhes bya
ba ni 'grel pa byed pa sbyor ba'i tshig rtsom pa dag la ni sgrub pa ma tshang ba de
skyon du yang 'gyur ba bden no zhes khas blangs pa'i tshig yin no || (P 63b6-7).
PSP Tib as usual presents a relative/co-relative construction where PsP Skt has a
construction with the conjunction yat, with however loss of the sense of obligation
conveyed by the Skt optative participle kartavyam when it is replaced with the
nominalized form rjod par byed pa: 'on te sbyor ba’i ngag rgyas par rjod par byed pa
gang yin pa 'di ni 'grel pa mkhan po rnams kyi lugs yin no zhe na. The optative
participle suggests that nyāya (“usual manner," "general procedure") should be trans-
lated in its extended meaning of "rule"; PsP Tib has translated, perhaps precisely
because it does not take the optative sense into account, nyāya with lugs. PsP Tib
further translates vṛttikāra with the less standard and non-literal 'grel pa mkhan po.
We are left with the overall impression that the translators took minor liberties with
the sentence.
1⁹6 *LȚ's author identifies the tārkika as Bhāviveka (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 122, 135
[fol. 2a4]).
197 PSP Tib has dbu ma pa'i lta ba (mādhyamikadarśana).92
TRANSLATION
(svatantraprayogavākya) out of a desire to communicate [therewith]
no more than his extreme skill (atikauśala) in the science of
reasoning (tarkaśāstra) is observed to be, to a more extreme degree
(atitarām), the basis for an assemblage of many faults. 198 Why? To
begin, here in that which was stated [by him as follows],
The [formal] inference, for its part, turns out to be this:
"Ultimately (paramarthataḥ), the internal bases (adhyātmikāny
āyatanāni) have not arisen from self, because [they] are [already]
existing, like consciousness (caitanya)"19⁹
1⁹8 Translated in Yotsuya 1999: 78; Hopkins 1983: 500; Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 43. The
latter interprets the sentence as if it would be conditional: "Moreover, if he [viz.
Bhavya] has formulated an autonomous (svatantra) formal probative argument
(prayogavākya) out of a desire to reveal ... just his own high expertise in the science
of eristics this is considered ... ." Stcherbatsky (1927: 105, n. 5) translates
upalakṣyate in the meaning “indirect indication,” but Candrakīrti is pointing out that
the faults are clearly observed.
199
PP: 'dir sbyor ba’i tshig tu 'gyur ba ni don dam par nang gi skye mched rnams
bdag las skye ba med par nges te | yod pa'i phyir dper na shes pa yod pa nyid bzhin
no || (D 49a2-3; P 58b1-2; cf. Kajiyama 1963: 49; Ames 1993: 221f.; Yotsuya 1999:
79; Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 44). PsP Skt lacks equivalents for 'dir (*atra) and nges
(*niścitam) and includes etat, which is not attested in PsP Tib or PP Tib (the
translators of PSP Tib cite directly from PP Tib). Candrakīrti may have been writing
from memory, or intentionally more freely, and thus the deviation.
181.
Consciousness (caitanya) is the nature of purușa. It exists in purușa even before the
causal process involving prakṛti occurs but is evident only in dependence on prakṛti,
in the way that the burning of fire or the cutting of an axe is evident only if there is
something to be burned or cut (YD 184.28-30: prāg api kāryakaraṇasambandhāt
puruṣe caitanyam avasthitam <...> tadyathā agner dahanam paraśoś chedanam
<ca>? asati dāhye chedye ca na vyajyate); see also, e.g., Chakravarti 1975: 231f.;
315ff.; Frauwallner 1984: 275; Larson and Bhattacharya 1987: 73-83. Pure
consciousness representative of purușa is, like prakṛti, not an evolute of something
else (cf. YD 66.18-20: ihācetanā guṇā ity etat pratipādayiṣyāmaḥ | yac ca
yenārabhyate tanmayam tad bhavati | yadi gunaiḥ puruṣāṇām ārambhaḥ syāt teṣām
apy acetanatvam syāt | cetanās tu te | tasmān na guṇair ārabhyanta iti siddham etat).
Consciousness has been adduced as the example for Bhāviveka's independent
inference because, given that the Mādhyamikas accept consciousness, viz., vijñāna,
on the surface level of reality, this example, which is accepted by the Sānkhya and
the Mādhyamika in a general way, i.e., irrespective of the way in which the school of
each debater specifically interprets consciousness, fulfills the requirement of being
acknowledged by both parties; see Avalokitavrata's comments on this example at n.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
93
for what purpose is the qualification (viseṣaṇa) "ultimately"
(paramārthataḥ) employed?200
§40. If [Bhāviveka says it is employed] because the arising
accepted201 from the point of view of the worldly surface [level] is not
being negated and because if [this arising thus accepted] were denied,
there would result [the logical fault of] sublation [of the thesis] by
200 From this point on (up to PsPM §48 [= PSP₁ 28.3]), Candrakīrti considers and
rejects possible responses to the question of the purpose of the qualification relative
to its domain of application. Yotsuya's (1999: 80) elucidation of the structure of the
text is worthy of reiteration; he presents the three hypothetical applications of the
qualification thus: “On this point there are three conceivable alternatives: 1. The
qualification “ultimately” is attached to the whole of the proposition, implying that
entities such as the inner sense-fields do not originate from self. 2. The qualification
'ultimately' is attached to the whole of the proposition except the word 'svataḥ',
implying that entities such as the inner sense-fields do not originate. 3. The
qualification ‘ultimately' is attached only to the probandum, i.e. non-origination” (I
omit Yotsuya's section and sub-section numerals). Candrakīrti considers the first
alternative for the qualification, that is, paramārthataḥ applied to the entire
proposition, which covers the section PSPM §40-end of §44 (PsP₁ 26.3-27.6), from
both the point of view of philosophers (PSPM §40-end of §42 [PsP₁ 26.3-27.2]) and
the point of view of ordinary persons (PSPM 842-end of §44 [PsP₁ 27.2-6]); the
philosophers addressed are Buddhists (PsPµ §40–end of §41 [PsP₁ 26.3-12]) and
Sankhyas (PSPM §41-end of §42 [PsP₁ 26.12-27.2]). Yotsuya (ibid., 81) states, “a)
Bhāvaviveka cannot conventionally tolerate an origination from self as maintained
by philosophically minded people. b) Bhāvaviveka cannot conventionally tolerate an
origination from self as maintained conventionally by non-philosophically minded
people a-i) Bhāvaviveka himself, as a Buddhist, especially as a follower of
Nāgārjuna, will not be able conventionally to maintain an origination from self. a-ii)
Bhāvaviveka cannot conventionally tolerate origination from self as maintained by
his Sāmkhya opponent." The second alternative for the domain of the qualification,
indeed the alternative actually intended by Bhāviveka which implies that ultimately,
arising (instead of arising from self) is negated, is discussed (and rejected on the
grounds of subject failure) in the section PSP §45-end of §46 (PsP₁ 27.7-10); the
third alternative, which according to Candrakīrti would have to be reformulated as
sāmvṛtānāṁ cakṣurādīnāṁ paramārthato nāsty utpattiḥ but would even in this form
not escape the fault of subject failure, is discussed in PSPM §47 (PSP₁ 27.10-28.3).
M
201
Yotsuya (1999: 81) retains, against de Jong's ms R and his ms T2 (= mss D and J)
and on the basis of his mss T1 and T3 (= mss H and I), de La Vallée Poussin's
emendation lokasamvṛtyābhyupagatasyotpādasyāº; mss P and B (Q has a lacuna at
this point) now confirm de Jong's emendation lokasamvṛtyābhyupetasyotpādasyā°.
See PSPM $40.94
[we
what is accepted [by the Madhyamika] (abhyupetabādhā),202
reply that] this is not correct, because [a Madhyamika] does not even
from the [point of view] of the surface [level of reality] accept arising
from self.2
203
TRANSLATION
202 Stcherbatsky (1927: 106, n. 2) understands abhyupeta in de La Vallée Poussin's
cābhyupetabādhāprasaṁgāt as an adjective to bādhā and must supply in brackets the
object he judges repudiated: “And if denied, the admitted repudiation (bādha) (of the
phenomenal by the absolute) would not be entailed (read prasangāt)” (Stcherbatsky's
textual emendation appears to be based on an erroneous interpretation of a of
ᵒbādhāprasangāt as implying an alpha privative). Yotsuya (1999: 81) interprets the
compound to mean, “it would follow that what is [generally] accepted (abhyupeta)
[by the Madhyamikas] would be denied." Hopkins (1983: 502) attempts to take the
instrumental in PsP Tib's khas blangs pas gnod par thal bar 'gyur ba'i phyir into
consideration in his translation, "it would follow that one would be damaged by
[one's own] assertion [of conventionally existent production]," but Candrakīrti
intends the technical meaning of abhyupetabādhā, specifically, that the thesis of the
inference would be sublated by what the Madhyamika's own system accepts: the
unqualified proposition that the inner bases have not arisen from self is contradicted,
is sublated has, so to speak, the rug pulled out from under it—by the fact that the
Madhyamika does accept the arising of things on the surface level; without the
qualification, (hypothetical) Bhāviveka argues, the opponent would attack the
proposition as being spurious (pakṣābhāsa). Lindtner (1986: 80, n. 29) points out that
Bhāviveka recognizes, like Dignāga in NM and PS, five types of sublation (bādhā)
with regard to the subject (pakṣa): the pakṣa is liable to contradiction/sublation
(virodha, bādhā) with/by one's own statement (svavacana), authoritative testimony
(āgama), what is generally acknowledged (prasiddha), direct perception (pratyakṣa),
and inference (anumāna) (cf. Tucci 1930: 7; Katsura 1977: 113). Lindtner further
notes that Bhāviveka distinguishes between what is generally acknowledged in the
world and what is generally acknowledged in one's own śāstras (see PP to MMK
II.17cd, where Bhāviveka responds to the opponent who argues that Bhāviveka's
position regarding the non-existence of a goer or of going is unacceptable because it
is contradicted by what is acknowledged: 'dir gtan tshig gyi don gang yin | ci 'jig rten
la grags pa sel bar byed pa'i phyir ram | 'on te bstan bcos la grags pa sel bar byed
pa'i phyir ... gal te rang gi bstan bcos la grags pa (ba) sel bar byed pa'i phyir de
grags pa'i gnod par 'gyur ro (P: |) zhe na ni | (P: without ) khas blangs pa la gnod
par 'gyur ro (P:|) zhes brjod par bya ba’i rigs (D 70a1-3; P 84b4-7); translated in
Ames 1995: 321f. It would appear that Candrakīrti here in the PsP intends sublation
by what is generally accepted in one's own śāstras. On the historical development of
pakṣābhāsa, see Preisendanz 1994: 319, n. 88, especially 319-323.
203 As succinctly explained by Yotsuya (1999: 84), Candrakīrti rejects Bhāviveka's
qualification “ultimately” as superfluous because the Mādhyamika does not accept
arising from self even on the surface level; such a distinguishing of one level of
reality from the other via the qualification would be necessary only if non-ultimatePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§41. As has been stated in the [Śālistamba-]sūtra,
And this very sprout that is arising, which has a seed for [its]
cause, is not produced from itself, not produced from another,
not produced from both [itself and another], nor has it arisen
without a cause; it has not been brought about by the Lord
(īśvara), time (kāla), atoms (anu), primordial matter (prakṛti), or
the nature [of things] (svabhāva).²
95
204
arising from self was indeed accepted by the Madhyamika. Thus its employment by
Bhāviveka, if intended as applying to the whole of the proposition, carries with it the
implication that he does accept arising from self on the surface level. The subsequent
sūtra and śāstra quotations are brought forward to demonstrate the general, non-
qualified rejection of arising from self for arising in dependence (cf. Hopkins 1983:
501-503; della Santina 1986: 157f.). Candrakīrti does not yet speak to the fact that
Bhāviveka actually employs the qualification to avoid negating the dependent-arising
of surface-level things that is accepted by Madhyamikas (cf. §45-§47).
204 Candrakīrti's Śālistambasūtra citation differs from the Skt for the Śālistambasūtra
passage found in the BCAP and the Madhyamakaśālistamba: sa cāyam ankuro na
svayamkṛto na parakṛto nobhayakṛto neśvaranirmito na kālapariņāmito na prakṛti-
sambhūto na caikakāraṇādhīno nāpy ahetusamutpannaḥ (references and variants in
Schoening 1995: 705). The Dunhuang manuscript reading (as well as the readings in
other Tibetan editions) is close to the Skt attested in the BCAP and the Madhyamaka-
śālistamba: myu gu de yang bdag gis ma byas | gzhan gyis ma byas | gnyis kas ma
byas dbang phyug gis ma byas | dus gyis ma bsgyur | rang bzhin las ma byung | rgyu
myed pa las kyang ma skyes te; text and variants in Schoening 1995: 403f. PsP Tib
differs in a number of respects from Candrakīrti's citation and shows similarities
with the text as found in the Dunhuang manuscript, etc. The citation of a parallel
passage from the Śālistambasūtra at PsP₁ 567.2-4 generally (for variants see
Schoening 725f.; see also La Vallée Poussin 1913a: 75) corresponds with other
Sanskrit fragments for the passage and with the non-PsP Śālistambasūtra Skt for the
earlier citation: sa ca nāmarūpāṁkuro na svayamkṛto na parakṛto nobhayakṛto neśva-
rakṛto na kālapariņāmito na prakṛtisambhūto na caikakāraṇādhino nāpy ahetu-
samutpannah.
Bhāviveka, in his discussion regarding the non-arising of things without a cause,
offers the alternative meaning of “bad cause” (rgyu ngan pa) for ahetu of MMK I. 1's
ahetutaḥ and lists as examples of bad causes the nature of things (svabhāva), the
Lord (īśvara), spirit (or “Cosmic Man") (puruṣa), primordial matter (prakṛti), time
(kāla), the god Nārāyaṇa, etc. (rgyu ngan pa gang zhe na | ngo ba nyid dang | dbang
phyug dang | skyes bu dang | gtso bo dang | dus dang | sred med kyi bu la sogs pa [D
50b7-51al; P 61a4-5]; the bad causes alluded to by la sogs pa are listed at PPT D
114a5; P 132a8; see Ames 1993: 247, n. 146). Bhāviveka explicitly addresses and
refutes svabhāva, īśvara and purușa as causes for the arising of things, and prakṛti as
the cause of the principles (tattva), and states that the general refutation of prakṛti,96
In the same manner [in the Lalitavistara],
In the way that there is a sprout when a seed exists, but the
sprout is not the seed: it is neither other than that [seed] nor is it
just that [seed] so is the actual nature (dharmata) [of all
elements of existence]: [there is] neither annihilation (anuc-
cheda) nor permanence (aśāśvata),205
TRANSLATION
kāla and Nārāyaṇa as causes should be considered as like that of īśvara (cf. D 52b6;
P 63b4). The Vaiśeṣika doctrine of the arising of things from atoms (aṇu) is refuted
when Bhāviveka argues for non-arising from a cause that is other. The group sva-
bhāva, īśvara, prakṛti, purușa, kāla and Nārāyaṇa appears in Candrakīrti's
commentary on the YS verse of homage, where he states that there is no chance at all
for the proponents of these as causes to proceed to the city of nirvāṇa (cf. YṢV ed
21.21-22.2; YȘV 108 and n. 18 for references). Cp. the grouping found at PsP₁
159.7: iha bhagavatā tathāgatena prakṛtīśvarasvabhāvakālāṇunārāyaṇajaimini-
kaṇādakapilāditīrthakarakartṛvādanirāsena sarvabhāvānāṇ tattvam ādarśitam. Ref-
erences for these causes in May 1959: 122, n. 320; on svabhāva, cf. also Silburn
1989: 132ff. and Bhattacharya 2012; on time, Silburn 1989: 137ff. See additionally
the description of the svabhāva doctrine at Buddhacarita 9.58-62.
tr
205 Lalitavistara 176.11-12 (ed. Lefmann). Lefmann's version of the verse runs:
bījasya sato yathāṁkuro na ca yo bīja sa caiva ankuro | na ca tato na caiva tat (= tat
with virāma) evam anuccheda aśāśvata dharmatā ||. The citations of the verse in the
PSP (PSP₁ 108.8-9, 377.1-2, 428.2-5, 551.1-4; see May 1959: 74 and note 106; cited
also at MABhed 115.12-13) attest the word anyu (MABh: gzhan) in the third quarter.
The Tibetan translation of the Lalitavistara (in both D and P) attests the verse-half as
it is attested in PsP Tib, i.e., with an equivalent for anyu. One has to admit that tataḥ
without anyu is, if not misleading, at least laconic. One also expects the fourth
quarter to commence with evam, i.e., for the caesura to occur after the third quarter
and not, as Lefmann's reading would have it, within the third quarter. The evidence
thus would indicate that Lefmann's third quarter is faulty and that Candrakīrti's anyu
needs to be incorporated into it. The quarter read as na ca anyu tato na caiva tat
conforms to the requirements of the verse's Vaitālīya metre (with anyu in this
position, the fourth syllabic instant is also correct; Lefmann's na ca tato breaks the
Vaitālīya rule that the fourth syllabic instant not be conjoined with the fifth). This
leaves the fourth quarter, however, with extra and disturbing syllabic instants. De La
Vallée Poussin (cf. PsP₁ 26, n. 4) seeks to partially solve the metrical problem of the
fourth quarter of Candrakīrti’s version of the verse by suggesting the reading
aśāśvadharmatā, although he admits that this solution “ne va pas sans difficulté.” He
further emends anuccheda to anucheda, but even with this additional change metrical
problems remain (see “Additions et Corrections” PsP₁ 597; read “Page 26, ligne 9”
for "Page 26, note 9"). It is possible that evam was originally Buddhist Hybrid
Sanskrit ev' or em (cf. BHSD s.v. em), and given that metrical requirements in
Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit verse were occasionally fulfilled through oral pronun-PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
97
Also here [in the Madhyamakaśāstra, Nāgārjuna] will say,
That which comes to be in dependence on something else, first,
is of course not just that [on which it depends].
Nor is it other than that [on which it depends]. [Thus,] it (= that
which is depended on) is not annihilated, nor [is it] permanent.206
ciation, that e of ev' or em was pronounced as a light vowel. This would leave
aśāśvata as the only irregularity: one short syllabic instant is expected where it has
two, i.e., °śvata. De La Vallée Poussin's solution aśāśvadharmatā, which assumes a
dropping of ta, would then provide for a metrical pāda, but whether this was the
original reading remains uncertain.
My translation is closer to de La Vallée Poussin's translation, viz., “De même qu'il y
a pousse quand il y a graine; mais la pousse n'est pas ce qu'est la graine; elle n'est ni
autre ni la même chose: de la sorte, la nature des choses n'est ni permanente ni
anéantie" (MABh₁ 1910: 310) than to that of either May or de Jong, who translate
the verse with emphasis on the seed as the subject being considered. May (1959: 74)
translates: "Il y a une pousse s'il existe un germe. Ce germe n'est pas identique à la
pousse. Il n'est ni différent d'elle, ni non plus identique à elle. De même, la nature
des dharma est ni anéantissement ni éternité”; de Jong (1949: 33) translates “Il y a
une pousse s'il existe une semence. Cette semence n'est pas identique à la pousse.
Elle n'est ni différente de la pousse et ni non plus identique à elle. Donc la nature des
chose est non-anéantie et non-éternelle.” PsP Tib for the verse takes the sprout as the
primary object of consideration (sa bon gang yin myu gu de nyid min), as does
Candrakīrti in his MA commentary when he employs this quarter as the response to
the claim that it is not correct if the sprout is different from the seed (sa bon gyi rgyu
can myu gu yang 'byung ba na sa bon las gzhan nyid du mi rung ngo zhe na gsungs
pa | sa bon gang yin myu gu de nyid min | (MABhed 115.17-19). It is, of course,
the
sprout that deserves the focus, for it is contingent on it that the permanence or
annihilation of the seed might be posited. I have avoided using the words "different"
or "identical" in my translation to make clear that the difference/otherness and
identity/oneness being negated here is a numeric one, and not a qualitative one.
206 MMK XVIII.10: pratītya yad yad bhavati na hi tāvat tad eva tat | na cānyad api tat
tasmān nocchinnam nāpi śāśvatam ||. The verse is again cited by Candrakīrti at PsP₁
230.1 and PSP₁ 423.7, and is quoted by him at MABhed 116.18-117.2 (references to
translations and comparable verses in May 1959: 174, n. 555). The variant reading
nocchedo which de La Vallée Poussin finds in his manuscripts for the citation at PSP₁
222.6-7 and mentions at PsP₁ 26, n. 5 and PsP₁ 375, n. 6 is not attested in ms P (he
corrects his PSP₁ 26, n. 5 reference to the verse as 18.7 on p. 597, and on p. 605, he
corrects his PSP₁ 375, n. 6 reference regarding the citation of the verse to PSPL
222.6).
PSP Tib P, N and G for second verse-half attest de las gzhan pa’ang ma yin phyir || de
phyir chad min rtag ma yin || (Skt: na cānyad api tat tasmān nocchinnam nāpi
śāśvatam ||). PsP Tib D and C replace phyir of the third quarter with te. ABhed, BPed98
TRANSLATION
§42. If [it is argued that] the qualification [“ultimately” has been
added not in consideration of our own views, but] with reference to
the [Sankhya] opponent's doctrine (paramata), that [justification] is
incorrect, because [the Madhyamika] does not accept their (= the
Sankhya's) establishment (vyavasthā) even from the point of view of
the surface [level of reality]. For [only] insofar as the non-Buddhists
(tīrthika), who are wholly deprived of the correct view of the two
truths, are refuted in both ways [i.e., on the ultimate and on the
surface levels], can it (= the refutation) be considered to be truly of
advantage (guṇa).207 Thus, even [if it is employed] with reference to
the opponent's doctrine, the stating of the qualification is not tenable.
and PP D and P read de las gzhan pa'ang ma yin phyir. MMK₁ (P) reads: de las
gzhan pa'ang ma yin pa (D: phyir) || de phyir chad min rtag ma yin ||. See also Ye
2011a: 306.
ed
tr
Erb presumes the verse to be attested in the SSV but to be veiled by the poor Tibetan
translation: brten nas byung ba gang dang gang || re zhig de nyid des mi bskyed ||
gzhan las kyang min de yi phyir || rtag min chad pa yang ma yin || (ŚSV 252.34-37);
his German translation follows MMK XVIII.10's Sanskrit (SSV 93); see his note
912. Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 46) translates the PsP's citation as "That which comes
into existence in dependence [on a conditioning factor] is, then, not that [factor
itself], nor is it other either. Hence it is neither destroyed not eternal" (read the final
“not” as “nor”), but note that Candrakīrti does not understand tasmāt in the sense of
"hence" but rather as “from that"; cf. PsP₁ 376.7 and 376.10-11 and the translation in
Yotsuya 1999: 82. Garfield's (1995: 252) translation of nocchinnam (chad min) and
his assumption that that which depends is the subject in the final quarter ("Therefore
it is neither nonexistent in time nor permanent") obfuscates the verse's meaning.
207 Bhāviveka might argue that the qualification is added to avoid forcing the
opponent into over-negation, that is, in order that the surface level of reality be
preserved for the Sankhya. However the Sānkhya, not including within his doctrinal
edifice a theory of two levels of truth, will not be able to appreciate the distinction
being made. Moreover, his view of surface level reality, were he to have one, would
admit arising from self, and this the Mādhyamika cannot consent to, even with regard
to the surface level of things. Although not explicitly referred to by Candrakīrti, the
qualified inference could imply-were the Sankhya to understand the two truth
theory that the Madhyamika accepts arising from self on the surface level and is
therefore indirectly utilizing the inference to establish arising from self on this level.
Yotsuya (1999: 85-86) writes: “Candrakīrti thus concludes that it is better to refute
the non-Buddhist such as the Sāmkhya without drawing a line between the ultimate
and conventional, but by offering arguments that are effective on both levels." Cf.
Stcherbatsky 1927: 107, n. 3; della Santina 1986: 158; Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 46;PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
99
§43. Nor it is the case that the world (loka) (= non-philosophers)
assumes arising from self, so that the qualification would be purpose-
ful (sāphalya) at least with reference to it; for the world, not having
launched an investigation (vicāra) [into whether things arise] from
self [or] other, etc., presumes [merely] this much: an effect arises
from a cause.
208
§44. The Master [Nāgārjuna] has also determined [it] thus [i.e., that
arising from self is negated without qualification]. It is therefore
ascertained that the qualification is useless (vaiphalya) in every
regard.20
209
Hopkins 1983: 503. Bhāviveka does in fact set forth an inference refuting arising
from self on the surface level in MHK III.139: tatra tāvat svato janma samvṛtyāpi na
yujyate | sātmakatvād yathā dadhnaḥ svato janma na vidyate || (cf. Watanabe 1998:
139; Lindtner 2001: 23; Heitmann 2009: 67).
208 Candrakīrti argues that the qualification “ultimately" is useless even if it is
claimed to be employed in consideration of the world's, i.e., ordinary people's,
understanding of the way things arise, since ordinary people simply assume that an
effect arises from a cause without pursuing the matter further. Given that speculation
as to whether things arise from themselves or not is the domain of philosophers and
is foreign to the general populace, the inference as a whole is inapplicable to worldly
ideas of arising.
Cp. MA VI.12, which occurs in the context of the rejection of arising from self via
the rejection of the identity of cause and effect: loko 'pi caikyam anayor iti
nābhyupaiti naṣṭe 'pi paśyati yataḥ phalam eșa hetau | tasmān na tattvata idam na tu
lokataś ca yuktam svato bhavati bhāva iti prakalpam || (Li 2012: 4; Skt cited at
MABh 1910: 283, n. 7 [prakalpyam for prakalpam]; cf. MABhed 86.1-2, 9-10). See
further MA VI.31 where Candrakīrti denies that the world can be an authority (tshad
ma) at the time of discussion of final reality and thus a sublater, for sublation by what
is acknowledged in the world ('jig rten kyis gnod) is valid only in cases where
worldly things have been negated (MABhed 113; MABh 1910: 308).
tr
209
I concur with Yotsuya that the ācārya referred to in this sentence is Nāgārjuna, not
Bhāviveka as de La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 27, n. 2) suggests, and that what Nāgārjuna
has determined (vyavasthāpayāmāsa) is that the negation of arising from self is a
general, unqualified negation (see Yotsuya: 1999: 87, n. 56). The commentary on
MA VI.12cd (see previous note) contains the following references to Nāgārjuna's
non-employment of a qualification and to Bhāviveka's inference: de nyid kyi phyir
slob dpon gyis khyad par du ma mdzad par bdag las ma yin zhes spyir skye ba bkag
pa yin no || gang zhig dngos po rnams ni don dam par bdag las skye ba ma yin te | yod
pa'i phyir sems pa (MABhun: without pa) can bzhin no || zhes khyad par du byed pa
de'i don dam par zhes bya ba'i khyad par don med do zhes bya bar (MABHUN:
1100
§45. Moreover, if this qualification is employed by [Bhāviveka
because] he wants to rule out (nirācikīrṣu) a negation2¹0 of arising
(utpattipratiṣedha) on the surface [level], then there would be the
TRANSLATION
without bya bar) bsam par bya'o || (MABhed 86.11-15; MABh 1910: 284). The
passage is cited and translated by Yotsuya (1999: 87, n. 56) as follows: "Therefore,
the master (= Nāgārjuna) has negated origination generally, without attaching any
qualification, in the following way: '[Entities] do not originate from self.' With
respect to him (= Bhāvaviveka) who qualifies [the inference as follows:] ‘Ultimately
entities do not originate from self, because they are [already] existing, like the spirit,'
it should be emphasized that the qualification ‘ultimately' has no purpose." Other
translators (some are mentioned by Yotsuya in his note; see in addition Hopkins
1983: 502-503 and della Santina 1986: 158, both in reliance on Tibetan exegesis, and
also Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 47) have assumed that the PSP sentence refers to Nāgār-
juna's establishment of cause and effect as in accord with that of the world, but if
taken in this way, the sentence would be, if not a non sequitur, at least superfluous to
the discussion. The presentation of the view of ordinary people is a last-ditch attempt
on the part of hypothetical Bhāviveka to rescue and justify the addition of the
qualification, and whether Nāgārjuna accepts this view or not adds no support to the
argument against the meaningfulness of the qualification and in fact abruptly places
the discussion in a new arena. It should be noted that unlike in de La Vallée
Poussin's edition, where a half daṇḍa appears after pratipannaḥ and another half
daṇḍa is placed after vyavasthāpayāmāsa (PsP₁ 27.5), mss P and Q and mss B, D,
and K attest a single daṇḍa (double daṇḍas appear rarely in the older manuscripts)
after pratipannaḥ, while A, C, E, G-J, L, M, and N all attest a double daṇḍa, thus
indicating that the manuscript tradition understood a full stop after pratipannaḥ and
that a new thought begins with evam (Q also places a daṇḍa after vyava-
sthāpayāmāseti; ms P is damaged). The double shad after rtogs pa yin no in PsP Tib
corroborates the manuscript evidence.
210 PSP Tib lacks an equivalent for pratiṣedha; that is, whereas the Skt sentence
begins api ca yadi samvṛtyotpattipratiṣedhanirācikīrṣuṇā
Tib begins gzhan yang
gal te kun rdzob tu skye ba dgag par 'dod nas ... . Hopkins' brief introduction to his
translation from the Tibetan may represent the way certain dGe lugs pa scholars have
dealt with the faulty text. He appears to understand Bhāviveka to be arguing for
employment of the qualification because he wants to refute the arising of truly
existent inner bases such as the visual faculty both ultimately and on the surface
level. Hopkins (1983: 503) states: “Bhāvaviveka might, however, say that ‘ultimate'
should be affixed to the subject because the production of an eye sense, which the
Sāmkhyas accept as ultimate, is refuted even conventionally: An ultimate eye sense
is not produced from self because of existing, as in the case, for example, of an
existent consciousness." According to Yotsuya's (1999: 80, 87) analysis, with this
paragraph the second of the three alternatives for the scope of the qualification
“ultimately” is taken up, namely, the qualification is attached to the whole of the
proposition with the exception of the word “svataḥ.”PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
101
fault of the proposition (pakṣadoșa), [namely, that the proposition is]
unestablished with respect to [its] locus (asiddhādhāra) from [his]
own [point of view] (svataḥ),211 or the fault of the reason (hetudosa),
[namely, that the reason is] unestablished as regards [its] basis
(aśrayāsiddha) [from his own point of view],212 because the bases
211 Candrakīrti rejects Bhāviveka's justification for employment of the qualification
on the ground that Bhāviveka, in order to address in argumentative form the Sānkhya
belief in the arising of ultimately existent inner bases, has declared that the
(ultimately) existent inner bases are the subject of the inference even though he does
not maintain that they really exist: the proposition (pakṣa) will be one whose basis
(ādhāra) (= subject [dharmin]) is not established (asiddha) for Bhāviveka. Given that
the subject must be established for both opponents for the proposition to be valid, the
proposition incurs the fault that its basis is not established for both of the debaters.
On this point, see also Yotsuya 1999: 88.
Dignāga defines the proposition (pakṣa) in PS III.2 as follows: svarūpeṇaiva nir-
desyaḥ svayam isto 'nirākṛtaḥ | pratyakṣārthānumānāptaprasiddhena svadharmiņi ||;
Tillemans (1994: 298, see also n. 10) translates: "[A valid thesis] is one which is
intended (ista) by [the proponent] himself (svayam) as something to be stated
(nirdesya) in its [proper] form alone (svarūpeṇaiva) [i.e. as a sādhya]; [and] with
regard to [the proponent's] own subject (svadharmin), it is not opposed (anirākṛta)
by perceptible objects (pratyakṣārtha), by inference (anumāna), by authorities (āpta)
or by what is commonly recognized (prasiddha)." Tillemans (1998: 112; see also
2000: 194f.) states, “By saying that the thesis or ‘what is being proven' (sādhya)
should not be opposed (anirākṛta) ‘with regard to [the proponent's] own [intended]
subject (svadharmiņi),’ Dignāga supposedly recognized that not only the property to
be proved (sādhyadharma) should be unopposed by any means of valid cognition
(pramāṇa), but also that the proponent's subject must be existent, for if the subject
were not existent it could not have the property, and hence the thesis would be
invalidated."
212 In referring to āśrayāsiddha, Candrakīrti indicates the alternative fault, a fault of
the reason, that Bhāviveka's inference incurs: inasmuch as its basis, i.e., the subject
"the internal bases-the visual faculty, etc.," is not established for Bhāviveka, the
reason "because they are [already] existing" will be invalid, for lacking an
established subject it cannot meet the first requirement of a valid reason, namely,
being existent in what is to be inferred (PS II.5cd: anumeye sadbhāvaḥ). Not being an
attribute of the subject (pakṣadharma), it is an unestablished reason (asiddhahetu);
see Tillemans 2000: 195, n. 160; Yotsuya 1999: 88. In the NM, Dignāga names
āśrayāsiddha as one of four sub-types of the unestablished reason; it is exemplified
by way of a non-Buddhist's inference in which ātman is presented as the subject for
the non-Buddhist and his opponent, a Buddhist who considers ātman a fiction (cf.
Tucci 1930: 14 and n. 26; Katsura 1977: 125); the example is presented again in PSV
(P 128a1-2 (K): chos can ma grub pa ni dper na bdag khyab pa yin | bde ba la sogs pa
thams cad na yod pa'i phyir ro zhes bya ba lta bu’o ||). According to Preisendanz102
TRANSLATION
(ayatana)-the faculty of vision, etc.—are not ultimately accepted
from [Bhāviveka's] own [side].
§46. If [Bhäviveka replies that] there is no fault because the visual
faculty, etc., exist on the surface [level], [we pose the question:] This
[word] "ultimately," then, [serves as] a qualification for what?2¹3
§47. If [Bhāviveka argues that] because the arising of the surface
[level] visual faculty, etc. (sāmvṛtānām cakṣurādīnām) is negated
from the ultimate point of view (paramārthataḥ), “ultimately" is used
1994: 176f., Uddyotakara, influenced by Dignāga's logic and appropriating the
rubric asiddha for the unproved (sādhyasama) reason, names the aśrayāsiddha
reason as the second of three asiddha reasons.
Of interest in the context of Candrakīrti's reference to these faults of the proposition
and reason is a short section in the NM which, according to Katsura (1992: 230f.),
seems to represent an earlier standpoint of Dignāga's as regards the permissibility of
subjects accepted as existent by the opponent but refused as such by oneself: in this
section the use of the subject pradhāna in a Buddhist inference that aims to prove
that pradhāna does not exist because it is not perceived (anupalabdheḥ) is allowed,
even though the subject is a real thing for the opponent Sankhya and a mere
conceptual construction (kalpita) from the Buddhist point of view. Imperceptibility is
considered an attribute of the subject by both debaters, thereby securing pakṣa-
dharmatva. In the PS, however, conceptual subjects are only allowed as the subjects
of consequences (prasanga), in large part because the Buddhist does not need to
accept the pakṣadharmatva of the reason (cf. PSV on PS III.16 and 17; my thanks to
Toshikazu Watanabe for providing me with a copy of his unpublished paper "How
can the existence of the Sankhya's pradhāna be negated (dūṣaṇa)? Dignāga's view of
refutation,” read at the 2011 Congress of the International Association of Buddhist
Studies). See also Tucci 1930: 16f.; Katsura 1978: 110f.; Tillemans 1998: 115-117
and 2000: 197f.; Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 48, n. 51. Dignāga thus revised his earlier
views and rejected the legitimacy of inferences positing unreal or conceptual sub-
jects. On Dharmakīrti’s appropriation of the NM argument and later interpretations
of his position, see Tillemans 1998; Tillemans and Lopez 1998; see also Funayama
1991; on the Nyāya-Buddhist controvery, see, e.g., Matilal 1970.
213 In order to refute the charge of having a non-established subject from his own
side, Bhāviveka could retort that his subject exists from the point of view of the
surface reality. Yotsuya (1999: 90) explains: "This [adopting of a conventional
subject], however, would imply that the debate in which he engages is held on the
conventional level. And if he intends to pursue the discussion on the conventional
level, it is meaningless to adopt the qualification ‘ultimately', which has the function
of determining that the discussion is held on the ultimate level.” See also Hopkins
1983: 504.103
as a qualification for the negation of arising,2¹4 [we respond:] Then
[this being] the case, it has to be stated exactly thus, viz., “Ultimately,
there is not the arising of the surface [level] visual faculty, etc.”; but
[your inference] is not stated in this way. Even if it were formulated
[in this way], owing to the fact that the opponent maintains that the
visual faculty, etc., indeed exist substantially (dravyasat) and does not
accept that [these bases merely] exist by designation (prajñaptisat),
there would be, from the opponent's side (parataḥ), the fault of the
proposition (pakṣadoṣa) [namely, that the proposition is] unestab-
lished with respect to its locus (asiddhādhāra).215 Thus, this
[justification for the qualification] is not reasonable.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
214 Bhāviveka attempts to rescue his qualification “ultimately" by reducing its scope
to only non-arising (the third of the three alternatives for the qualification
distinguished by Yotsuya [1999: 80]). That is, hypothetical Bhāviveka, who first
reduced the qualification's scope from the entire proposition to the proposition minus
svataḥ, now argues that the qualification also does not apply to the subject
ādhyamikāny āyatanāni; it rather applies exclusively to non-arising. His intended
subject is thus the surface level ādhyamikāny āyatanāni, and his inference proves that
there is no ultimate arising for these things that do exist, albeit only by designation,
on the surface level. As Yotsuya (1999: 90) has stated, “This solution allows him to
accept the subject conventionally on the one hand and to negate its origination
ultimately. He thus seems able to escape both the fault of the proposition (pakṣadosa)
and the fault of the logical reason (hetudoșa)." See the following note.
2¹5 In order to avoid the faults of asiddhādhāra and āśrayāsiddha, Candrakīrti’s
Bhāviveka claims that the surface-level, i.e., merely designated, faculty of vision,
etc., are defined by him as the subject. In his view he is shielded from critique by this
surface-level subject: he could not be charged with setting forth a subject unestab-
lished from his own side, and his intent could be realized since via the negation of the
ultimate arising of the surface-level subject the real arising of the faculty of vision,
etc., as maintained by the Sankhya would be proven untenable. Candrakīrti initially
appears to provisionally accept Bhāviveka's defense, but chastises him for not
formulating his inference more precisely so that it conforms with his intended
meaning. He then deals a death blow to the provisionally accepted proposal by de-
claring that the Sānkhya under no circumstance accepts the inner bases as existing
merely by conventional designation, for he maintains their real existence, and thus
could not consent to Bhāviveka's surface-level subject; the proposition would suffer
from having a locus which is not established for the Sānkhya. The fact the subject is
unestablished from the Sāṁkhya side would further imply the fault of the reason,
aśrayāsiddha. See also Yotsuya 1999: 91.104
TRANSLATION
§48. [Bhāviveka] might [argue]: [It is] just as [with the proposition]
"Sound is impermanent," [where] only the general (sāmānya)
[nature], not the particular (viseșa) [nature], of the property possessor
(dharmin) and the property (dharma) is taken [as the subject and
predicate]; for if the particular [nature] were taken [into account],
there could not be conventional practice (vyavahāra) involving
inference (anumāna) and the object of inference (anumeya).216 To
216 As will be made clear by the examples provided by hypothetical Bhāviveka, two
parties whose specific views regarding their subject differ radically are able to debate
on the basis of a common subject when they accept as shared the general nature of
the subject unencumbered by particular doctrinal specifications. That the unqualified
form of the subject, etc., is legitimately used even in a proof demonstrating the
ultimate nature of things appears to have been the position actually held by the
historical Bhāviveka. According to this view, the subject of his inference, e.g., the
internal bases such as the faculty of vision, etc., could stand as a general subject, free
of the doctrinal specifications of surface-level or ultimate existence that would attract
the charges of asiddhādhāra or āśrayāsiddha. The subject from Bhāviveka's side
would still be the surface-level internal bases, and for the Sankhya the ultimately
existing internal bases, but for the purpose of debate it would not be specified in
either way.
Bhāviveka refers to general subjects, reasons and examples in other contexts in the
PP. He explicitly defends the reason in some of his inferences in the first chapter of
PP as being a general one (see, e.g., the discussion at PP D 49b7-50a1; P 59b5-6).
Note too his explicit reference to a generally established example at PP D 52b3-4; P
63b1: shes pa spyir grub pa kho na las dpe nyid blangs pas dpe med pa yang ma yin
no (see Ames 1993: 232).
A defense of the logical subject defined as the internal bases is seen later in the first
chapter of the PP when Bhāviveka is attacked by opponents (identified by
Avalokitavrata as Naiyāyikas) who accuse his inference proving that the inner bases
do not arise from other (don dam par nang gi skye mched rnams de dag gi rkyen
gzhan dag las skye ba med de | gzhan yin pa’i phyir | dper na bum pa bzhin [D 49b4;
P 59a7-8]) of having an empty subject term and thus a reason unestablished as
regards its basis: gzhan dag na re | don dam par phyi dang nang gi skye mched rnams
khas ma blangs pa'i phyir chos can ma grub pas gzhi ma grub pa’i phyir khyod kyi
don ma grub pa nyid kyi skyon du 'gyur ro zhes zer (PP D 50a4-5; P 60a3-4). He
retorts that he conventionally accepts the basis, i.e., a pot or the visual faculty, etc., as
well as the reason, i.e., being different [from the causal conditions], and therefore the
opponent's critique is inappropriate: tha snyad du de'i gzhi bum pa dang mig la sogs
pa skye mched rnams dang | gzhan nyid khas blangs pa'i phyir ji skad smras pa'i
skyon mi 'thad pas de ni rigs pa ma yin no || (PP D 50a5; P 60a4-5; translated in
Kajiyama 1963: 53; Ames 1993: 225).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
105
Yotsuya (1999: 93, n. 72) notes that Ejima points to a passage in the PP on MMK
XVIII.1 where Bhāviveka employs ātman as the subject of inferences and defends his
use of it as a subject used in a general sense. The situation differs from that being
discussed in the PSP in that Bhāviveka argues for the legitimacy of the subject from
his side in this instance on the ground that Buddhists apply the term “ātman” to cons-
ciousness. His argumentation is nevertheless worth citing: one of the inferences
discussed is don dam par bdag ni za pa po ma yin te | the tshom can gyi shes pa la
sogs pa'i rgyu yin pa'i phyir | dper na sdong dum dang (P: ) bum pa bzhin
(“Ultimately, the self is not the experiencer, because it is a cause of doubtful know-
ledge, etc., like a tree stump and a pot"); the passage continues: ci ste yang la la 'di
snyam du dbu ma pas bdag (P: bdag gi) tshig gi don nyid du khas ma blangs pa'i
phyir de'i khyad par bstan pa mi rigs te | dper na mo gsham gyi bu’i sngo bsangs
dang | dkar sham nyid la sogs pa (P: dag ston pa for la sogs pa) bzhin no snyam du
sems na de ni bzang po ma yin te | yang (P: yang na) 'byung ba’i srid pa len pa'i
phyir bdag ces bya ste | rnam par shes pa'i yul la bdag tu tha snyad gdags pa'i phyir
rnam par shes pa la bdag tu brjod de | de ltar yang bcom ldan ’das kyis | sems dul ba
ni dge ba ste || dul ba'i sems kyis bde ba 'thob || ces gsungs nas (P: nas yang) mdo sde
gzhan las | bdag gi mgon ni bdag nyid yin || gzhan ni mgon du su zhig 'gyur || mkhas
pa bdag nyid legs dul bas || mtho ris dag kyang 'thob par 'gyur ||2zhes gsungs pas |
de'i phyir tha snad du bdag spyir khas blangs pa’i khyad par ma grags pa sel ba’i
phyir skyon med do || (PP D 180b2-5; P 224b4-8); “Even if some would think this:
Because the self is not accepted as a thing (*padārtha) by Mādhyamikas, it is not
correct to point out its particular [features], even as [it is not correct to point out] the
blackness or blondness [of the hair] of the son of a barren woman, [we respond:] This
is not correct. It is called ‘self' because it appropriates the rebirth existence; because
the sphere of consciousness is designated as 'self,' consciousness is stated to be
'self.' In this way, too, the Bhagavān, having said, 'Taming the mind is good, a
tamed mind is one that brings happiness,' [then] stated in another sūtra, 'The master
of the self is just the self, who else could be the master? The wise person who has
tamed the self well even/also attains heaven.' Therefore, because the unacknow-
ledged particular [features] of the conventional self which is [nevertheless] accepted
in a general way are omitted/excluded, the fault does not exist."
1
¹ Udānavarga 31.1cd: cittasya damanam sādhu cittam dāntam sukhāvaham ||.
Dhammapada 35cd. Cited BCAP 98.7, 484.3.
2Udānavarga 23.17: ātmā tv ihātmano nāthaḥ ko nu nāthaḥ paro bhavet | ātmanā hi
sudāntena svargam labhati panditaḥ ||. Dhammapada 160. Cited at PsP₁ 354.5-6 (see
also BCAP 483.16-17): ātmā hi ātmano nāthaḥ ko nu nāthaḥ paro bhavet | ātmanā hi
sudāntena svargam prāpnoti paṇḍitaḥ ||. Cited by Candrakīrti at MABhed 245.4,
257.2, 257.7; SSV ed 218.3-6 (where ko nu nāthaḥ has been translated into Tib as if ko
'nunathaḥ stood in the Skt); for further references see Erb 1997: 136, n. 344. Cf.
AKBhed 27.6-12 (corrected following AKBh; 42.19-43.1): ātmany asati katham
ādhyātmikaṁ bāhyam vā | ahamkārasamniśrayatvāc cittam atmety upacaryate | ātma-
nā hi sudāntena svargam prāpnoti paṇḍitaḥ || ity uktam | cittasya cānyatra damanam
uktam bhagavatā | cittasya damanam sādhu cittam dāntam sukhāvaham || iti | ata106
TRANSLATION
explain: If sound dependent on the four primary elements (cātur-
mahābhautika) is taken [by the Buddhist as the subject in the above
proposition],217 that [sound] is not established for the opponent
[Mīmāmsaka].218 But if [sound as] the quality of space (ākāśaguna) is
taken [as the subject by the Mīmāmsaka],2¹9 it is not established for
the Buddhist himself. Similarly also for the Vaiseṣika proposing the
impermanence of sound: If sound is taken as a product (kārya), it is
ātmabhūtasya cittasyāśrayabhāvena pratyāsannabhāvāc cakṣurādīnām ādhyātmika-
tvam rūpādīnām viṣayabhāvād bāhyatvam |.
Seyfort Ruegg's comment (2002: 51, n. 52) on hypothetical Bhāviveka's assertion
that only the general nature of the property, i.e., subject, and of the property
possessor, i.e., predicate, is taken into account, viz., “The anumānānumeyavyavahāra
would not be possible were it the particular rather than the general intended here
because, according to the Pramāṇavāda, anumāna has to do with the sāmānya-
lakṣaṇa" should be ignored, because Candrakīrti is not intending any reference to
Dignāga's svasāmānyalakṣaṇa distinction and its related theories but is rather
pointing out that Bhāviveka holds that logical subjects and predicates that are
common to both parties, i.e., free from doctrinal specifications that would otherwise
render debate impossible, should be relied upon.
2¹7 See AK II.22 and corresponding AKBh, AKVy 123.20-28; Frauwallner 1958: 97-
98.
218
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 51) identifies the opponent in the initial example, i.e., the
opponent for whom sound dependent on the four primary elements is not established
and who holds that sound is a quality of space, as the Naiyāyika and Vaiśeṣika;
Stcherbatsky (1927: 109) refers to the opponent as a Vaiśeșika. A debate, however,
between the Buddhist and these philosophers would be unnecessary since the
Vaiseșikas and Naiyāyikas maintain that sound, even though posited by them as a
quality of ether, is impermanent. Hopkins (1983: 506f.), following Tsong kha pa,
also assumes this opponent to be a Vaiśeșika, and understands the second debate
example to be presenting the discordant particular views of a Vaiśeșika and a Jaina
(see also the remarks in Yotsuya 1999: 93, n. 73); the Jainas, however, do not assert
permanent sound which merely manifests.
21⁹ See Frauwallner 1956: 59; 1984 II: 36. Although the Grammarian's theories of
padasphota and varṇasphota served as the model for the Mīmāmsă doctrine of the
eternality of sound, the Mīmāmsakas did not use the Grammarians' theory of varṇa-
sphota being manifested through sounds consisting of sound atoms, and instead
appropriated the Vaiśeṣika system's theory of sound as a quality of ether, rejecting,
however, that sound is produced by the contact of breath and the vocal organs and is
thus impermanent; see Frauwallner 1960: 241-242 (1982: 281-282) and 1961: 114-
118 (1982: 312-316).107
not established from the side of the [Mīmāmsaka] opponent. But if
[the subject sound is considered as] something to be manifested
(abhivyangya), it is not established from the side of [the Vaiśeṣika
him]self. 22¹ It is like this, according to the situation.222 Also [in the
case of the property (sādhyadharma)] cessation (vināśa = anitya): If
[cessation is considered to be] something that has a cause (sahetuka),
it is not established for the Buddhist himself. But if [cessation is taken
to be] causeless (nirhetuka), it is not established from the side of the
[Mīmāmsaka] opponent.² Therefore, just as here [in the cases
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
223
220
220 According to the Vaiseșika, sound is a quality of ether; non-repeatable sound
particulars arise in dependence on various acoustical events (dhvani) and then perish
(see, e.g., Vaiseṣikasūtra II.25-32; Frauwallner 1956: 51f.; 1984: II, 30f.; Halbfass
1992: 127). According to the Mīmāmsaka, sound is eternal (see MS I.1.6-23); on the
reasons for and origins of this doctrine, see Frauwallner 1961 (1982: 311-322); on
certain advantages this theory had over the Vaiseșika doctrine, see Frauwallner 1956:
59-61; 1984: II, 36-38. Cf. also Houben 1995: 46-47.
221
According to the Mīmāmsaka, sound, eternal and abiding in a potential form in
ākāśa, is merely brought to manifestation (abhivyanga). Through the effort of
speaking, internal air is propelled out of the mouth and into contact with the
surrounding external air in which it, spreading out via contact and disjunction
(samyogavibhāgau), reaches the ear of the hearer. Here it comes into contact with the
auditory faculty, the ākāśa in the cochlea, and imparting to it a potency (śakti),
produces modifications (samskāra) in this ākāśa that allow it to perceive the distinct,
though in actuality eternal, now temporarily manifested words intended by the
speaker (see Bhatt 1989: 180; Jha 1964: 117-118; Frauwallner 1956: 59f.; 1984: II,
36f.). The Vaiśeṣika posits sound as a quality of ākāśa, but considers sound to be
impermanent, produced in ākāśa through breath touching the vocal organs during the
effort of speaking. Sound moves toward the auditory faculty, the particular ākāśa in
the ear of the hearer, by reproducing itself as it comes into conjunction with
succeeding parts of external air, and is heard when it reaches the auditory faculty. On
ākāśa as the auditory faculty, see, e.g, Frauwallner 1956: 51f., 58f.; 1984: II, 31, 35f.;
on its determination as such by a process of exclusion, cf. Junankar 1978: 63 and
Preisendanz 1994: 680, n. 239.
222
I understand, contrary to PsP Tib and previous translators, evam yathāsambhavam
as a separate sentence.
223
According to the Buddhist debater, cessation occurs spontaneously, without cause.
Cf. AKBhed 193.5-10: samskṛtasyāvaśyam vyayāt (AK II.2d) | ākasmiko hi bhāvānāṇ
vināśaḥ | kim kāraṇam | kāryasya hi kāraṇam bhavati | vināśaś cābhāvaḥ | yaś
cābhāvas tasya kim kartavyam | so 'sāv ākasmiko vināśo yadi bhāvasyotpannamā-
trasya na syāt paścād api na syād bhāvasya tulyatvāt | athānyathībhūtaḥ | na yuktam
tasyaivānyathātvam | na hi sa eva tasmād vilakṣaṇo yujyate |. Translated in von108
TRANSLATION
presented, one takes] merely the general [nature] of the property
possessor (dharmin) and the property (dharma), in this present case
too the mere property possessor [i.e., the internal bases such as the
visual faculty, etc.], whose particular [nature, i.e., the inner bases
determined as existing from the point of view of the surface level or
the ultimate] is waived [for the sake of debate], will be taken [as the
subject].224
Rospatt 1995: 180-181, n. 397: “[The momentariness of everything is established]
because the conditioned entity necessarily perishes. For the destruction of things is
spontaneous. For which reason? For [only] an effect has a cause, but destruction is
non-existence, and what should be effected with respect to non-existence? If this
spontaneous destruction of the thing did not occur as soon as it had originated, it
would also not occur later because the thing would [then] be [just] the same [as it was
earlier] (i.e. it would also then have the nature to persist and not to perish). [Nor
could it perish later] after having become different [in the meantime]. [For] it is not
possible that one and the same thing becomes different, because one and the same
[thing] cannot differ in character from itself." Cf. also the Yogācāra proofs for mo-
mentariness based on the non-existence of causes of cessation in ibid., 1995: 178f.
and 180 n. 396. The Mīmāmsakas, on the other hand, posit cessation as effected by
causes and reject this Buddhist idea. Cf. ŚV VI.24-30 (śabdanityatādhikaraṇa) (24ab:
āhuḥ svabhāvasiddham hi te vināśam ahetukam |) and Bhatt 1989: 366ff. Within the
Buddhist fold but not taken into consideration by Candrakīrti in the above are the
Sarvāstivādins and Vātsīputrīya-Sammatīyas, who in assuming the doctrine of the
four samskṛtalakṣaṇas maintain that an internal factor, namely, the fourth
samskṛtalakṣaṇa anityatā is responsible for the cessation of an entity (see, e.g., Cox
1995: 146-151, 349-353); whereas the Sarvāstivādins deny that an entity is dependent
on causes external to itself for its cessation, the Vātsīputrīya-Sammatīyas claim that
external causes actualize the latent efficiency of the lakṣaṇa anityatā (cf. von Rospatt
1995: 53f.). Candrakīrti himself critiques the view of uncaused perishing; see PSP₁
173.8-174.4; YṢVed 58.13-25; YȘVÅ 194-196 and n. 324.
tr
224 Bhāviveka, in applying this general debate procedure to his inference, considers
the subject, the inner bases, to be free from being determined as either surface-level
or ultimate, and believes that this relieves the proposition and reason of being liable
to the faults of, respectively, asiddhādhāra and āśrayāsiddha (see n. 211 and n. 212).
His inference in this regard (presuming that Candrakīrti still assumes the
qualification in Bhāviveka's reasoning to be connected with non-arising; cf. his
reformulation sāṇvṛtānāṁ cakṣurādīnāṁ paramārthato nāsty utpatti [see PsP³ §47;
PSP₁ 27.10-28.1]), may be stated as: "The inner bases, unspecified as conventional or
ultimate, ultimately do not arise from self."
The author of the TJ also considers the qualification as attached to the predicate of
the proposition (in this case the reasoning being discussed is MHK III.26: tatra
bhūtasvabhāvam hi norvyādi paramārthataḥ | kṛtakatvād yathā jñānaṁ hetu-
mattvādito 'pi vā ||; TJ: 'dir sa la sogs pa dag ces bya ba ni chos can yin la | don damPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
109
[We reply:] But this is not the same, because this very [one, namely,
Bhāviveka] himself has accepted that precisely when225 the negation
of arising (utpădapratiṣedha) is intended here as the property to be
proved (sādhyadharma), there is the loss (pracyuti) of the property
possessor (dharmin), the locus of that [property] (tadādhāra), whose
[ascribed] existence (atmabhāva) has been procured through sheer
225
par (D: par na) 'byung ba'i ngo bo nyid ma yin zhes bya ba ni de’i chos yin no || chos
can dang chos bsdus pa ni phyogs yin te | [ed. Iida 1980: 84f.; Heitmann 2004: 124;
that the qualification is attached to the predicate has been noted also by Seyfort
Ruegg 1981: 65]). Yotsuya (1999: 97, n. 86) notes that the final sentence of the
defence of the qualification further on in the commentary on MHK III.26 ('dir de
dam bcas pa'i khyad par nyid bzung bas nyes pa med do) appears to indicate that don
dam par qualifies the whole proposition; one might presume that the TJ's author,
having specified earlier that the qualification is applied to the predicate of the thesis,
is here using the word pratijñā in a more general sense. He defends the usage of the
qualification "ultimately” (and indirectly the unspecified subject; see Candrakīrti's
critique beginning with the next sentence) by arguing that the qualification should be
understood as intending the paramārtha associated with conceptuality: don dam pa ni
rnam gnyis te de la gcig ni mngon par 'du byed pa med par 'jug pa 'jig rten las 'das
pa zag pa med pa spros pa med pa'o || gnyis pa ni mngon par 'du byed pa dang bcas
par 'jug pa bsod nams dang ye shes kyi tshogs kyi rjes su mthun pa dag pa 'jig rten
pa'i ye shes zhes bya ba spros pa dang bcas pa ste 'dir de dam bcas pa'i khyad par
nyid bzung bas nyes pa med do || (TJ D 60b4-5; P 64a7-64b1; quoted in Yotsuya
1999: 97, n. 86; Tibetan text and translation in Iida 1980: 86, 87; Heitmann 2004:
130ff.). Yotsuya (ibid., n. 86) states, “As the passages cited from the TJ show,
something which is found through cognition conformable with the ultimate, and
which can be a subject that is unspecified either as 'conventional' or as ‘ultimate,' is
what Bhāvaviveka is assumed to maintain in this context in the PMV," and translates:
“There are two kinds of paramārthas: one is [cognition] which arises without [con-
ceptualizing] effort, and which is beyond the world, undefiled and without
diversification; the other is [cognition] which arises possessing conceptualization and
conforms with the assemblage of wisdom and virtue; it is called 'pure worldly
gnosis' and possesses diversification. In this connection, since it (= the second kind
of paramārtha) is held to be the qualification of the proposition, a fault is not
incurred [by me (= Bhāvaviveka)]." The argumentation for the general subject as
presented here in the PsP is also translated in Cabezon 1992: 279 but the rendering is
problematic.
For the sake of the English, I have not translated the corresponding tadaiva. P, N
and G Tib correctly attest de’i tshe kho nar for tadaiva; D and C Tib, however, attest
de'i tshe de kho nar, a reading accepted and elaborated on by Tsong kha pa. See
Yotsuya 1999: 99, n. 93, and 128, n. 43; Hopkins 1983: 825, n. 424; 1989: 19f.;
Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 53, n. 57.110
error.
TRANSLATION
226
For error (viparyāsa) and non-error (aviparyāsa) are [utterly]
226
Cp. MABhed 102.18-103.1 where, in the context of describing the samvṛti aspect of
things, bdag gi yod pa (*ātmabhāva) is said to be found through the force of false
vision: gzhan (= samvṛti) ni so so'i skye bo (MABhun: bo’i) ma rig pa'i rab rib kyi
ming (MABhun: ling) tog gis blo'i mig ma lus par khebs pa rnams kyi mthong ba
rdzun (MABhun: brdzun) pa’i stobs las bdag gi yod pa rnyed pa yin te |.
UN
M
The section from PsP §48 (response) to end of the first sentence of §50 (PsPÅ 29.7
to 30.16) rejects the possibility of a common subject for the proponent and the op-
ponent and, to borrow Yotsuya's terminology, presents the "Crucial Point" in
Candrakīrti's critique of svatantra reasoning. Its structure and argumentation are laid
out in detail in Yotsuya 1999: 97-107. I agree with Yotsuya that the proponent here is
Bhāviveka as a Mādhyamika, and not Bhāviveka as a Svātantrika-Mādhyamika; he
states (ibid., 98, n. 87): “It seems to me, however, that Candrakīrti points out that it is
inappropriate not for the Svātantrika-Mādhyamika but for a true Mādhyamika to
employ svatantra-reasoning." Candrakīrti argues in this first sentence of the section
(= Yotsuya's 'Passage A I,' p. 99) that Bhāviveka's general subject, i.e., the inner
bases unspecified as surface-level or ultimate according to Candrakīrti, however, a
subject necessarily surface for Bhāviveka is ruined for Bhāviveka when non-arising
is accepted as the sādhyadharma. The next sentence provides the reason for this.
Yotsuya (ibid., 100) explains: “In Candrakīrti’s interpretations of ultimate truth
(paramartha) we cannot find an entity of intermediate ontological status between the
conventional and the ultimate such as Bhāvaviveka accepts For Candrakīrti, the
conventional and the ultimate are utterly distinct. This implies that the conventional
entity cannot be possibly established on the ultimate level, and further that, on the
ultimate level, the subject (which for him is a conventional entity) is not established
in a form unspecified as conventional or ultimate" (see his translation of the present
paragraph at ibid., 99-101).
Stcherbatsky (1927: 110f.) wrongly interprets the entire passage as focussed on what
he considers the dual reality posited by the Madhyamaka school, viz., the universe as
whole as ultimate Reality and the separate, related parts that make up the whole as
phenomenal reality; see, however, his literal translation (ibid., 111, n. 4) which
retains more of the sense of the passage. Cabezon's (1992: 281) translation of the
section from the Tibetan where it is cited in the sTong thun chen mo would have
benefited from a comparison with the Sanskrit or a perusal of Hopkins’ translation
from the Tibetan (Hopkins has checked at least part of the Sanskrit; see Hopkins
1983: 825, n. 424). Hopkins (ibid., 510), however, misled by PSP Tib's placement of
gang gis na de'i tshe na kun rdzob tu 'gyur ba (yena tadānīm samvṛtiḥ), translates the
final sentence, “Like the falling hairs and so forth of one without cataracts, when a
non-erroneous [consciousness of meditative equipoise on emptiness] does not
superimpose the unreal [i.e., objects established by way of their own character], how
could it observe the merest portion of a conventionality that does not exist [by way of
its own character]?" Thurman's (1991: 335, n. 138) literal translation from the
Sanskrit has a number of problems; the first sentence, e.g., is translated as “[That is
not so;] because, when as here the negation of production is accepted as probandum,111
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
distinct (bhinna).227 Thus, when through error what is inexistent (asat)
is taken to be existent, like the hairs and so forth [seen] by a person
with [the visual disorder called] timira,228 how [could there be] the
[Bhavaviveka] himself postulates that it would be a grievous error for its basis, the
subject [of the syllogism], to have an intrinsic nature established merely by erroneous
[cognition]." Tillemans' (1990: 47, n. 107) translation of the section from the San-
skrit is much more accurate; ātmabhāva refers, however, to the [ascribed] existence
(of the dharmin), and not, as Tillemans has it, to "the self's possessions [such as the
eye, etc.]." See also the translation by Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 53f.).
I have not managed to locate the passage Candrakīrti refers to in which Bhāviveka
addresses the loss of the dharmin. Yotsuya (1999: 100, n. 95) cites 'Jam dbyangs
bzhad pa's referral to a statement by Bhāviveka in the MHK in his dBu ma la 'jug
pa'i mtha' dpyod lung rigs gter mdzod zab don kun gsal skal bzang 'jug ngogs. See
also Hopkins 1989: 24.
The *LT glosses viparyāsa with bhrānti. The *LȚ's author appears to mistakenly
understand the dharmin to be the subject Candrakīrti has posited for Buddhapālita's
inference, i.e., a pot, etc.: viparyāso bhrāntis tanmātreṇāsāditātmabhāvasya gha-
tāde[r] dharmiņa utpattir nāstīty ukte tasya pracyutir abhāvo 'ngīkṛtā (cf. Yonezawa
2004: 122, 136 [fol. 2a4]). He may, however, have understood pot, etc., as a hypo-
thetical general subject, in the sense proposed by Bhāviveka, that would be accepted
by the Madhyamika and his opponent.
227 viparyāsa and aviparyāsa refer to the subjective, active side of error and have thus
been translated as “mistaken [cognition] / non-mistaken [cognition]" by Yotsuya
(1999: 100). Hopkins (1983: 508f.) translates phyin ci log tsam gyis of the previous
sentence as "by a mere erroneous [consciousness]," but translates phyin ci log dang
phyin ci ma log pa dag of the relevant sentence as "The erroneous and the non-
erroneous," which he explains as the erroneous objects and non-erroneous objects
found by their respective mistaken and non-mistaken consciousnesses; see his
discussion of Tsong kha pa's two interpretations of the sentence in Hopkins 1989.
Stcherbatsky (1927: 110f.) similarly relates (a)viparyāsa to the objective side of
error, i.e., to “illusion” and “reality." Hopkins (1983: 512f.), possibly misled by Tib's
use of phyin ci (ma) log (pa) for (a)viparyāsa and of phyin ci log for viparīta, goes on
to translate (a)viparyāsa and viparīta in the first sentence of the commentary
following the VV quotation in an objective sense. Candrakīrti is, however, being
consistent in his usage of (a)viparyāsa as a subjective state throughout this section
(he employs the word only in a subjective sense in the PsP); he resorts to viparīta to
refer to the objective side of error.
228 Persons with the timira condition are usually said to imagine that they see hairs
floating in the air or lying on their food or in eating utensils; the hairs are sometimes
described as a “net" of hair: cf. CŚT XIII where the individual with the timira
condition is said to see only a mesh of hairs and not each hair individually (Tib in
CŚȚTed 64-65; see also CST 275, n. 370). The condition may also cause the
taimirikas to imagine that they see small flies or mosquitoes (cf. PsP₁ 373.2: yathā hi
tr112
TRANSLATION
perception of even a trace (leśa) of a real thing (sadbhūtapadārtha)?
And when something unreal (abhūta) is not superimposed because
there is no error, just as hairs and so forth [are not superimposed] by
a person without [the visual disorder] timira, how [could there] then
[be] the perception of even a trace of an unreal thing, whereby the
surface (samvṛti) could exist at that time?
Just on account of this the Master [Nāgārjuna] has said:
If I perceived something by way of things like direct perception
(pratyakṣa) [and the other means of valid cognition], I might
affirm (pravartayeyam) or negate (nivartayeyam) [it];
[But] because that [object of perception] does not exist, I am
without reproach.²
229
And because in this way error and non-error are [utterly] distinct,
then, since what is mistaken (viparīta) cannot exist in the state of non-
error of the wise, how [could there be] a surface-level visual faculty
(sāmvrtam cakṣuḥ) which might be the subject (dharmin)? Thus,
neither the fault of the proposition [namely, that the proposition is]
unestablished with respect to [its] locus (asiddhādhāra), nor the fault
of the reason [namely, that the reason is] unestablished as regards
taimirikā vitatham keśamaśakamakṣikādirūpam paśyantaḥ ...). The common
translation "ophthalmia," i.e., conjunctivitis, the inflammation of the mucous
membrane (conjunctiva) lining the inner eyelids and the forepart of the eyeball, has
been corrected by May (1959: 226, n. 779), who cites the Indologist and
ophthamologist Filliozat: “Timira ne peut se traduire valablement par 'ophtalmie'. Ce
dernier terme désigne des conjonctivites qui ne donnent pas les symptômes de timira.
Timira = 'obscurité' ou plus généralement trouble visuel' dû à des opacités et
altérations de réfringence à l'intérieur des milieux transparents de l'œil." The
opacities, as he indicates, occur in the vitreous humour, the clear gel-like substance
filling the eye. See also, e.g., May 1959: 187, n. 610; La Vallée Poussin 1933: 30-31;
MABhd 109.6-110.11, 216.16-18. In the context of Madhyamaka discussions the
reference is usually to what is commonly known as "floaters." See also Kobayashi
2013 where the reference in certain Indian medical texts appears to be to cataracts.
ed
229 VV 30. Quoted earlier at PSPM §26 (PSP₁ 16.9-10).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
113
[its] basis (āśrayāsiddha), is eliminated.230 So this is definitely not a
refutation [of the logical faults].²²
231
§49. Nor is there similarity of the example (nidarśana) [that is, of the
exemplifying inference proving the impermanence of sound adduced
by Bhāviveka to demonstrate that a general nature of property
possessor and property is accepted by both parties]. For in that
[example], the general [nature] of sound (sabdasāmānya), and the
general [nature] of impermanence (anityatvasāmānya), without [any]
particular [nature] being intended, are agreed upon (samvidyate) by
the two [debaters].232 But it is not the case that, like this, [both] the
proponent of emptiness (śūnyatā[vādin]) and the proponent of non-
emptiness (aśūnyatāvādin) accept a visual faculty in general, either
from a surface [point of view] (samvṛtya) or ultimately. Thus, the
example is not similar. 233
§50. And precisely this method (vidhi) [that was employed] for
bringing out (udbhāvana) the fault of the proposition (pakṣadoṣa)
[namely, that the proposition is] unestablished with respect to [its]
locus (asiddhādhāra),234 should be employed for bringing out the fact
that this reason, "because [they] are [already] existing" (sattvāt),2³5 is
230
Hopkins (1983: 513) translates: "Therefore, due to the irreversibility of having a
fallacious position [thesis] in which the base [subject] is not established
(asiddhadhāra, gzhi ma grub pa) ... .”
231 This concludes, according to Yotsuya (1999: 98), the first aspect ("Point 1") of the
Crucial Point, viz., that the "subject which is unspecified either only as
'conventional' or only as ‘ultimate' is not established for the proponent." Candrakīrti
now proceeds to “Point 2,” viz., that “the subject is not established in common for
both the proponent and the opponent either conventionally or ultimately."
232
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 56) is of the opinion that the two debaters referred to would
be a Vaiśeṣika and a Buddhist (“… are available to both [parties to the debate, viz.,
the Vaiseșika and a Buddhist]”), but see my comments on §48.
233 *LȚ: ato na dṛṣṭāntena sahāsya sadṛśatā (ms: śadṛśatā) | yato viparyāsāvi-
paryāsāv anyonyavyavacchedasthitau (see Yonezawa 2004: 122, 136 [fol. 2a4-5]).
234 See PSPM
§45 to end of §47 (PsP₁ 27.7-28.3).
235 The logical reason for Bhāviveka's inference is first presented in PSP as
vidyamānatvāt (cited PsPM §39 [PsP₁ 26.1]), and then as sattvāt (first sentence of
PsP §50 [PsP₁ 30.15]; see also §54 [PsP₁ 33.4]), the former presented together with
M114
TRANSLATION
unestablished (hetor asiddharthatā). And this is so because this
logician (tarkika) himself [i.e., Bhāviveka] has also accepted this
matter (artha) as stated. How? [He states that Buddhist opponents
from the Conservative school have objected:]
[The causal conditions,] the cause (hetu) and so forth, which
produce the inner bases do indeed exist, because the Tathāgata
has instructed thus. For that which has been taught by the
Tathāgata [as being] a [certain] way [truly] is thus; for example,
[the Tathāgata taught that] nirvāṇa is peaceful (śānta) [and it
truly is thus].236
[In regard to] this proof (sādhana) put forth by the opponent, this
[logician Bhāviveka] has expressed the [following] criticism:
What meaning of the reason do you intend here then? [Do you
mean] "because the Tathāgata has instructed thus from the
surface [point of view]" (samvṛtyä) or ["because the Tathāgata
has instructed thus] from the ultimate [standpoint]" (para-
marthataḥ)? If [you claim he has done so] from the surface
[point of view], the reason is unestablished from [your] own
the rest of the inference, the latter on its own (i.e., the present instance) and later as
part of the reworked inference. Cp. PsPM §32 (PsP₁ 22.4) where the svata evanumāna
Candrakīrti presents in response to Bhāviveka's criticism contains the reason
vidyamānatvāt (see also the penultimate sentence of the first paragraph of PsPM §29
[PSP₁ 20.5-6] where the reason indicated will have to be construed as such).
L
*LT's author specifies that sattvāt refers to Bhāviveka's reason: sat[t]vād iti
sāmkhyam prati bhāvivekenoktam (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 122, 136 [fol. 2a5]).
236 The passage appears in Bhāviveka's commentary on MMK I.7. PP: nang gi skye
mched rnams skyed par byed pa rgyu la sogs pa ni yod pa kho na yin te | de ltar de
bzhin gshegs pas gsungs pa’i phyir | (D: phyir dang; PsP: phyir ro |) gang de bzhin
shegs pas ji skad gsungs pa de ni de bzhin te | dper na mya ngan las ’das pa ni zhi
ba'o zhes bya ba bzhin no || (D 58b3-4; P 70a7-70b1; translated in Kajiyama 1964:
115; Ames 1994: 109). The fellow Buddhists voicing the objection (rang gi sde pa
dag yang phyir zlogs par byed de) are identified by Avalokitavrata as Vaibhāṣikas
and Sautrāntikas (PPT: rang gi sde pa dag ces bya ba ni mdo sde pa dang bye brag tu
smra ba dag [D 191b5-6; P 223a2]).
Cf. AKBhed 80.22-23; 108.25: tadyathā sarvasamskārā anityāḥ sarvadharmā
anātmānaḥ śāntam nirvānam iti. More references in Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 58, n. 64.115
237
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
[point of view].237 If [you claim he has done so] from the ultimate
[standpoint, let us remind you that the Madhyamakaśāstra
states:]
According to Dignāga, not only the subject (dharmin), but also the reason (hetu) in
an inference must be acknowledged by each of the parties in the debate; see PS
III.11, as cited and translated in n. 147; PS III.12bc: prasiddhas tu dvayor api |
sādhanam (Katsura 2009: 158; see also Steinkellner 1988: 1429 and n. 8); NM:
pakṣadharmo vādiprativādiniścito gṛhyate (Katsura 1977: 122). A reason that is not
acknowledged by one of the parties is classified amongst the four types of unestab-
lished and therefore pseudo reasons (asiddhahetvābhāsā) as an anyatarāsiddha-
hetvābhāsa (cf. Tucci 1930: 14 and n. 24; Katsura 1977: 124). Cp. the example of the
reason "because it is made / a product" used by the Buddhists to prove the imper-
manence of sound which would not be accepted by a Mīmāmsā opponent propound-
ing the eternality of sound as set forth by Dignāga in PSV ad PS III.11 gcig la yang
bzlog pa ni mngon par gsal bar smra ba la byas pa nyid lta bu'o (PSVK P 27b8;
PSVK 481). See also n. 272. If, as regards the inference set forth in the PP and cited
here in the PsP, the Buddhist arguing for the existence of the causal conditions
should respond to Bhāviveka's question by stating that the meaning of the reason is
"because the Tathāgata has instructed thus from the surface [point of view]," the
reason is not established for himself because he asserts that the Tathāgata taught thus
from an ultimate point of view. Avalokitavrata also explains that when the reason is
asserted from the surface point of view, it will not be established for the fellow
Buddhist: 'di ltar khyed kyi sgrub pa ni de bzhin shegs pas don dam par rkyen bzhi po
dag yod par gsungs pa'i phyir | don dam par de dag las dngos po rnams skye bar 'dod
pa yin la | 'dir gtan tshigs kyi don ni de bzhin gshegs pas kun rdzob tu de skad gsungs
pa'i phyir zhes zer na | de ni kho bo'i (D: bo) 'dod pa yin pas khyed rang la ma grub
pa'i don nyid yin no || (D 192b1-2; P 224b6-7).
Kit
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 59) understands the passage differently than I do, possibly
because he has overlooked that tathā tathāgatena nirdeśāt of the first sentence of
Bhāviveka's response merely repeats the reason just set forth by the Conservative
Buddhist. He translates: “In what sense do you understand the sense of the inferential
reason: on the surface-level, since the Tathāgata has taught this thus, or in ultimate
reality?” His translation of the next sentence reveals that he does not take the reason
(hetu) referred to there to be tathā tathāgatena nirdeśāt, i.e., that of the Conservative
Buddhist, but rather to be sattvāt, the reason in Bhāviveka's own inference: "If you
think it to be on the surface-level, then the sense of the [above-mentioned] inferential
reason ['sattvāt, because of existing'] is unestablished for oneself (svatas)." A similar
interpretation appears in Seyfort Ruegg 1981: 77f., where there additionally seems to
be some confusion regarding the referent of the word svataḥ. svataḥ of samvṛtyā cet
svato hetor asiddhārthatā here in Bhāviveka's response to the Conservative Buddhist
arguing for causal conditions refers to this opponent himself, since he only accepts
the real, i.e., ultimate, existence of these conditions.116
TRANSLATION
When neither an existent, nor an inexistent, nor a [both]
existent and inexistent factor (dharma) comes forth
(nirvartate), 238
then because its (= the alleged cause's) being the condition
(pratyaya) of an existent, inexistent or both [existent and
inexistent] effect (kārya) has [thus] been refuted,
How is the cause [condition] (hetu) that which brings forth
(nirvartaka)? It being thus, [a cause condition] is not
[logically] feasible.239
[This] statement [by Nāgārjuna] means that that [alleged] cause
is definitely not [something which] brings forth [and hence in
reality not a cause]. And therefore, because that to be brought
forth and that which brings forth (nirvartyanirvartaka) are not
ultimately established, the reason (hetu) ["because the Tathāgata
has instructed thus" turns out to be either] unestablished
(asiddharthatā) or is contradictory [in that it proves the opposite
of the probandum it aims to prove] (viruddhārthatā)240 241
*LT's author wrongly interprets svataḥ ("from [your] own [point of view]") of
samvṛtyā cet svato hetor asiddhārthatā to refer to a Sāṁkhya opponent: svata iti
sāmkhyasya (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 123, 137 [fol. 2a5]). He seems to have confused the
Conservative Buddhist's reason with Bhāviveka's own reason vidyamānatvāt/sattvāt;
if this is the case, he is at least correct in understanding that when the samvṛtyā
alternative is applied to vidyamānatvāt/sattvāt, it is the opponent, i.e., the Sāṁkhya
who only accepts existence from the ultimate standpoint, for whom this reason would
be unestablished.
238
MMK I.7ab: na san nāsan na sadasan dharmo nirvartate yadā |.
239 MMK 1.7cd: katham nirvartako hetur evam sati na yujyate || (PSP₁, Ye 2011a: ...
evam sati hi yujyate ||). For the discussion regarding the emendation to 1.7d, see n.
592. My translation of the kārikā reflects Candrakīrti's interpretation of it as found in
his commentary on MMK I.7.
24⁰ If the Buddhist opponent answers that the reason means "because the Tathāgata
has instructed thus from the ultimate standpoint," the reason will be unestablished
because Nāgārjuna, communicating-according to the Mādhyamika—the Tathā-
gata's true intent, has shown in MMK I.7 that a cause condition does not ultimately
exist. The opponent has accepted that the reason is intended from an ultimate point of
view but the Madhyamika only accepts that the Tathāgata taught causal conditions
from a surface-level point of view. Just how the reason understood by the opponent
as meaning "because the Tathātaga has instructed thus from the ultimate standpoint"PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
117
could, alternatively, be viewed as a contradictory reason, i.e., as one proving the
opposite of the sādhya, is less evident: if the reason "because the Tathātaga has
instructed thus from the ultimate standpoint” is taken to mean that the Tathāgata
taught that causal conditions truly exist, then there is no contradiction, for the
opponent wishes to prove the ultimate existence of causal conditions. It seems that
Bhāviveka, in order to be able to present a contradiction between the reason and
probandum, intended that the opponent's reason, in being claimed to be from the
ultimate point of view, would mean "because the Tathāgata has instructed thus from
the ultimate standpoint, i.e., he taught that causal conditions do not truly exist, for he
taught from the ultimate point of view which denies the existence of all things." This
interpretation would deliver a contradiction inasmuch as the hetu communicating that
the teaching of causal conditions was given from the ultimate standpoint of no real
existence would contradict the sādhya claiming the real existence of causal
conditions. This alternative interpretation demands, however, an unexpected change
in the meaning of paramārthataḥ construed with the reason from "because the
Tathāgata taught them as existing in an ultimate sense" (as assumed for the
unestablished reason) to “because the Tathāgata talked about them from the ultimate
standpoint of no real existence." The understanding of the contradiction gleaned by
Hopkins (1983: 518) from his dGe lugs pa sources and/or informants is different; he
translates: “Or it is just contradictory [if the referent is to ultimate existence due to
being very contradictory with a predicate of the probandum which should be a
conventionality]." This interpretation assumes the reason "because the Tathāgata
taught them as existing in an ultimate sense” but factors in the Madhyamaka
viewpoint, according to which the causal conditions of the sādhya are strictly surface
level. The reason would thus be unestablished from the Mādhyamika's point of view
and contradictory from the Madhyamika's point of view.
Avalokitavrata states that should the Buddhist opponent assert that the reason meant
is "because the Tathāgata instructed thus from the ultimate standpoint," the reason
would be unestablished because, as demonstrated by Nāgārjuna in his kārikā, a cause
that brings forth is not possible. In explaining the contradiction, he states that even if
the opponent maintains that the Tathāgata taught the meaning of the reason to be that
the conditions exist from the standpoint of the surface level, the resultant
establishment of own nature as existing on the surface level would imply that he
agrees with the Mādhyamika view that it does not exist ultimately, and this surface-
level establishment would thus conflict with his actual position that own nature exists
ultimately. It is not clear to me if this represents the alternative interpretation of
"ultimately" suggested above (i.e., “because the Tathāgata has instructed thus from
the ultimate standpoint" taken to mean "because the Tathāgata talked about them
from the ultimate standpoint of no real existence") or if Avalokitavrata considers the
contradictory reason as applicable solely in the context of the reason asserted from
the surface point of view, i.e., understood as “because the Tathāgata has instructed
thus from the surface point of view." The outcome is of course in each case the same,
i.e., the opponent's reason proves something other than the probandum it aims to
prove. PPT: 'on te don dam par na ni zhes bya ba ni 'on te rang la ma grub pa'i don118
TRANSLATION
And because in this way this very [one] himself (= Bhāviveka), by
virtue of this procedure (nyaya), has accepted the non-establishment
(asiddhi) of the reason, as a result, since indeed in all inferences with
reasons adduced as properties of real things (vastudharmopanyasta-
nyid mi 'dod pas gtan tshigs kyi don de de bzhin gshegs pas don dam par de skad
gsungs pa'i phyir ro zhes zer na ni'o || de ltar na | gang tshe chos ni yod pa dang || (P:
) med dang yod med mi bsgrub (P: sgrub) pa || zhes bya ba brjod do || (P: de |) ... gtan
tshigs kyi don de ltar de bzhin gshegs pas gsungs pa'i phyir zhes bya ba de ma grub
pa nyid do || (P: nyid for nyid do ||) gtan tshigs kyi don 'gal ba nyid do zhes bya ba ni
ci ste de bzhin gshegs pas kun rdzob tu rkyen rnams yod par gsungs pa de nus pa'i
ngo bo nyid kyi (D: kyis) med na mi 'byung ba'i tshul gyis gtan tshigs su 'dod na 'di
la yang khyed kun rdzob tu ngo bo nyid yod par sgrub (P: bsgrub) pa ni don dam par
ngo bo nyid med par sgrub pa yin pas de ltar na khyod don dam par ngo bo nyid yod
par 'dod pa dang 'gal ba’i don nyid yin no || (D 192b2-7; P 224b7-225a7). Ames
(1994: 129, n. 104) appears to understand Avalokitavrata’s explanation of the contra-
dictory reason to be referring to the reason as asserted from the surface-level point of
view (samvṛtyā): “If it is asserted of superficial reality, it is contradictory to try to
prove a thesis about ultimate reality using a reason which holds only in superficial
reality."
24¹ Bhāviveka's response in the PP to the Buddhist opponent follows upon the
opponent's presentation of the application and conclusion (omitted in the following)
for his inference. PP: 'dir khyod kyi gtan tshigs kyi don du 'dod pa gang yin | de bzhin
gshegs pas kun rdzob tu de skad gsungs pa'i phyir ram | 'on te don dam par gsungs
pa'i phyir | gal te kun rdzob tu na ni (P without na ni) rang la (P without la) gtan
tshigs kyi (P without gtan tshigs kyi) don ma grub pa nyid do || 'on te don dam par na
ni | (D: ||) gang tshe chos ni yod pa dang || med dang yod med mi bsgrub¹ pa || de’i tshe
'bras bu yod pa dang med pa dang | gnyi ga’i bdag nyid kyi rkyen bsal (D: bstsal) ba’i
phyir | ji ltar sgrub byed rgyu zhes bya || de Ita yin na mi rigs so || de ni sgrub par byed
pa’i rgyu ma yin pa kho na’o (P: na’o ||) zhes bya ba’i tshig² gi don to || de’i phyir don
dam par bsgrub (P: grub) par bya ba dang | sgrub bar byed ba nyid ma grub pa'i
phyir gtan tshigs kyi don ma grub pa nyiď³ dang | don 'gal ba nyid¹ do || (D 58b6-
59a1; P 70b3-6). PsP: ¹'grub (ABh, BP and MMK, also attest 'grub); 2zhes bya ba ni
ngag for zhes bya ba’i tshig; ³gtan tshigs ma grub pa’i don nyid for gtan tshigs kyi
don ma grub pa nyid; ‘don 'gal ba'i don nyid for don 'gal ba nyid. Translated in
Kajiyama 1964: 116; Ames 1994: 109-110; both Kajiyama and Ames translate khyod
kyi of the first sentence as a possessive genitive qualifying gtan tshigs “eures
Grundes; your reason," but khyod kyi is the literal translation for bhavatām used in
the meaning of "on your part."119
hetuka) the reason and so forth are not established right from [his]
own [point of view], truly all proofs (sādhana) are ruined.242
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§51. For example, here [in Bhāviveka's inferences against arising
from other which he has stated as follows],
It is not the case, ultimately, that the inner bases arise from their
conditions (tatpratyaya), which are other [than the inner bases],
because [they] are other [than their conditions] (paratvāt), just as
a pot [does not arise from the conditions for the inner bases
which are other than the pot].24
Or,
It is not the case, ultimately, that the others (pare), the alleged
(vivakṣita) [conditions] that bring forth inner bases such as the
visual faculty, are admitted/recognized (pratīyante) as condi-
tions, because [they] are other [than the inner bases] (paratvāt),
like threads, etc. [which, other than the inner bases, are not
conditions for the inner bases],²
244
242 ādi of hetvādīnām refers to the other parts of an inference, such as the example.
*LT's author wrongly interprets svata eva as referring to the Sānkhya opponent he
imagines is the focus of the entire preceding passage: svata eveti sāmkhyasya (cf.
Yonezawa 2004: 123, 137 [fol. 2a5]).
243 Cf. Avalokitavrata's comments at PPT D 82b1-3, 83a5-83b2; P 96b2-5, 97a8-
97b6. Ames (1993: 223f.) translates para (gzhan) as “different,” which is certainly
not wrong, but does leave some ambiguity as to whether qualitative or numerical
difference is intended. Since this argument and the numerous other Madhyamaka
reasonings using paratva as ground for the impossibility of effects from causes focus
on numerical difference, I prefer to use “other” as a translation equivalent. Seyfort
Ruegg's (2002: 60) “from other conditions of theirs" does not quite catch the
meaning of parebhyas tatpratyayebhyaḥ.
244 The two inferences are presented in Bhāviveka's PP commentary on MMK I.1:
don dam par nang gi skye mched rnams de dag gi rkyen gzhan dag las skye ba med de
| gzhan yin pa'i phyir (D: phyir ) dper na bum pa bzhin no || yang na don dam par
gzhan brjod par 'dod pa mig la sogs pa nang (P: nad) gi skye mched 'grub par byed
pa dag rkyen ma yin par nges te | gzhan yin pa'i phyir dper na rgyu spun la sogs pa
bzhin no || (D 49b4-5; P 59a7-59b1; translated in Kajiyama 1963: 51; Ames 1993:
223f.). PSP Tib's presentation of yang na don dam par gzhan gyis brjod par ’dod pa
for yang na don dam par gzhan brjod par 'dod pa inspired Stcherbatsky (1927: 114
and n. 2) to emend pare to paraiḥ; he translates, "Thesis: The causes which in the120
"[they] are other" and so forth²45 (paratvādika) are not established
right from [his] (= Bhāviveka's) own [point of view] (svata
evāsiddha).246
§52. And just as [in the case of the opponent's proof, i.e.,]
TRANSLATION
opinion of our opponents, produce mental phenomena are not understood to be
causes in the absolute sense" (see also PSP₁ 31, n. 8, where de La Vallée Poussin
reconstructs atha vā paramārthataḥ parair vivakṣitāś cakṣurādyādhyātmikāyatana-
sādhakāḥ pratyayā asattvena niścitāḥ from PsP Tib, adding “La lecture paraiḥ est
intéressante"). De Jong (1978: 31), however, referring to observations made by
Ejima, insists that the reading pare be maintained (Hopkins [1983: 519 and n. 441]
notes de Jong but nevertheless translates following PsP Tib: "The producers of the
internal sources such as eyes, which others want to say [exist] ultimately, are not
ascertained as conditions [producing the internal sources] because of being other, as,
for example, is the case with threads and so forth"). PPȚ confirms the reading pare:
'bras bu mig la sogs pa nang gi skye mched rnams kyi rkyen mer mer po dang nur nur
po la sogs pa de dag ni gzhan yang yin | brjod par 'dod pa yang yin | mig la sogs pa
nang gi skye mched 'grub par byed pa dag kyang yin no zhes bya ba khyad par gyis
(P: gyi) bsdu bar bya'o (D 84b1-2; P 98b8-99a2); gzhan is commented on in the
following sentence: de la gzhan zhes bya ba ni rkyen mer mer po dang nur nur po la
sogs pa de dag 'bras bu mig la sogs pa nang gi skye mched gzhan du gyur pa de dag
la ltos (P: bltos) na gzhan nyid yin pa'i phyir gzhan zhes bya'o (D 84b2-3; P 99a2-3).
vivakṣitāḥ is glossed: brjod par 'dod pa zhes bya ba ni rkyen mer mer po dang nur
nur po la sogs pa de dag rkyen du smra ba gzhan dag gis rkyen nyid du brjod par
'dod pa'i phyir brjod par 'dod pa zhes bya'o || (D 84b3; P 99a3). Seyfort Ruegg
(2002: 60) construes the qualification paramārthena with vivakṣitāḥ: "[Conditions],
intended as other in ultimate reality ...
The logical reason in this argument of Bhāviveka's had already been criticized by
Sthiramati as being contradictory; see Kajiyama 1968: 198f.; Ames 244, n. 114; PPȚ
D 88a2-89b4; P 103a1-105al.
245 "and so forth" refers to the other members of the inference.
246 Bhāviveka, on the other hand, maintains in the PP that his reason is indeed
established inasmuch as he accepts it on the surface level. In response to an opponent
who has faulted his subject, the āyatanas, for not being established because Bhā-
viveka does not accept the āyatanas in ultimate reality, and thus his reason for being
āśrayāsiddha, he has responded that he admits both his subject and his reason "[they]
are other" (paratva, gzhan nyid) conventionally: tha snyad du de’i gzhi bum pa dang
mig la sogs pa skye mched rnams dang | gzhan nyid khas blangs pa’i phyir ji skad
smras pa’i skyon mi 'thad pas de ni rigs pa ma yin (PP D 50a5; P 60a4-5; translated
in Kajiyama 1963: 53; Ames 1993: 225). See n. 216.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
121
The inner things (bhāva) have indeed arisen, because activities
are performed by one [i.e., someone] qualified by the objects of
those [inner things] (tadviṣayavisiṣṭavyavahārakaraṇāt)247
247 This inference of the opponent is presented in the PP as part of Bhāviveka's
introduction to MMK II.1, and immediately follows his criticism of Buddhapālita’s
introduction to the same chapter.
PP: nang gi dngos po rnams¹ skyes pa kho na yin te | de dag gi yul dang ldan pa'i tha
snyad byed pa'i phyir² ro || 'di la gang mi skye ba ni de dag gi yul dang ldan pa'i tha
snyad mi byed de | dper na mo gsham gyi bu ʼgro bar mi byed pa bzhin no || lhas byin
dang khyab 'jug bshes gnyen ni de ltar 'gro bar mi (D without mi) byed pa ma yin pas
de’i phyir (P: phyir na/ni) nang gi dngos po rnams skye ba kho na yin no || (D 63a4-
5; P 75b4-5; translated in Ames 1995: 300f.). PsP Tib: ¹nang gi skye mched rnams
(*ādhyātmikāny āyatanāni) for nang gi dngos po rnams (ādhyātmikā bhāvāḥ); ²de dag
gi yul dang ldan pa’i tha snyad khyad par can byed ba'i phyir (= PsP Skt) for PP's de
dag gi yul dang ldan pa'i tha snyad byed pa'i phyir. PsP Tib's subject nang gi skye
mched rnams may represent an intentional "correction" of PP Tib carried out by the
PsP Tib translators (or apprentices assigned the task of copying in citations) owing to
their familiarity with the subject ādhyātmikāny āyatanāni; alternatively, āyatanāni
may have stood in place of bhāvāḥ in one of their manuscripts. As regards the more
elaborate reason in PsP Skt and PsP Tib: it would seem that Candrakīrti revised
Bhāviveka's *tadviṣayivyavahārakaraṇāt to read tadviṣayaviśiṣṭavyavahārakaraṇāt;
see below, where Avalokitavrata glosses *tadviṣayiᵒ with *tadviṣayavisiṣṭaᵒ: yul de
dag dang ldan pa zhes bya ba ni de dag gis khyad par can du byas pa te. It is possible
that the individual who copied the inference from PP Tib into PsP Tib attempted to
incorporate PsP Skt's visiṣṭa but misunderstood it as qualifying vyavahāra, and
thus changed the PP compound to de dag gi yul dang Idan pa'i tha snyad khyad par
can byed ba'i phyir. dang Idan pa may simply indicate that tadviṣaya is to be under-
stood as a bahuvrīhi. PP Chinese (T 30.1566:59c12f.) translates "because one can
speak of the [special] feature(s) of the object sphere of that" (*tadviṣaya-
višeṣa/visiṣṭavyavahārāt). At the next instance a few lines later, PP Chinese translates
"when there is no arising of this, one cannot speak of the [special] features of the
object sphere of that."
I do not see support for Stcherbatsky's (1927: 114 and n. 5) assumption that the
concept of arthakriyā is relevant to the understanding of the inference; nor does there
appear to be support for Hopkins' conjecture (cf. 1983: 519 and n. 442) that a
reference to Dignāga's PS is intended with the reason. Hopkins translates the reason
as “because of making the special designations of those which possess their objects
[that is to say, because of being the reasons why their respective consciousnesses are
called 'eye-consciousnesses' and so forth].”” According to Avalokitavrata, tha snyad
(vyavahāra) refers to physical activities such as the going, coming, sitting and eating
of a collectivity of bodily parts which facilitate these activities; this collectivity is
exemplified by "Devadatta." He dissolves and glosses the members of the compound
making up the reason as follows: de dag gi yul (*tadviṣaya) zhes bya ba ni mig la122
[in regard to which] this [logician Bhāviveka,]248 wanting to bring out
the fact that this reason stated by the opponent is not established, has
asserted:
TRANSLATION
But if it is [sought to be] proved that arising (utpāda) and going
(gati), etc., ultimately exist for the [meditatively] concentrated
(samāhita) yogi who with the eye of insight (prajñācakṣu)
beholds the real nature of things (bhāvayāthātmya), then the
reason, i.e., "activities are performed by one qualified by the
objects of those [inner things]" is unestablished, since right with
the refutation of arising going is also negated,24⁹
sogs pa nang gi skye mched de dag gi yul (D: yul yin) te | gzugs la sogs pa gzung ba
dang dmigs pa dag go | (D: ||) yul de dag dang ldan pa (*tadviṣayi°) zhes bya ba ni de
dag gis khyad par can du byas pa te | de dag dang 'brel zhing (P: cing) Idan pa lus
dang mgo dang lkog ma dang mchu dang lag pa dang rkang pa la sogs pa'i tshogs
'gro ba'i byed pa dang Idan pa 'o || de'i tha snyad byed pa'i phyir zhes bya ba ni lus
la sogs pa’i tshogs de’i tha snyad | dper na lhas (D: lha) byin 'gro'o ’ong ngo 'dug go
za'o zhes bya la sogs pa lta bu byed pa'i phyir | nang gi dngos po rnams skyes pa kho
na yin no zhes bya bar sbyar ro || (PPȚ D 219b4-6; P 256a4-7; also summarized in
Ames 1995: 337, n. 12).
248 *LT's author identifies the referent of the pronoun anena as Bhāviveka, and
considers the opponent to be the Sankhya (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 123, 137 [fol. 2a6]).
24⁹ PP: 'on te don dam par rnal 'byor pa mnyam par bzhag pa shes rab kyi mig gis
dngos po rnams kyi yang dag pa ji lta ba bzhin nyid mthong ba’i skye ba dang | (D:
without ) 'gro ba dang | 'ong ba dag¹ yod par sgrub na ni³ de dag gi yul dang ldan
pa'i tha snyad byed pa'i phyirª ro (P: ||) zhes bya ba'i gtan tshigs kyi don ma grub pa
nyid de³ | 'gro ba yang skye ba dgag pa kho na bzhin du dgag pas 'gro ba bkag pa’i
phyir ro' || (D 63a6-64b1; P 75b7-8; translated in Ames 1995: 301). PsP Tib: ¹skye ba
dang 'gro ba la sogs pa dag for skye ba dang | 'gro ba dang | 'ong ba dag; ²bsgrub;
³adds following de'i tshe; tha snyad khyad par can byed pa'i phyir for tha snyad
byed pa'i phyir; 5ma grub pa’i don nyid de for don ma grub pa nyid de; 6 'gro ba yang
skye ba bkag pa kho nas bkag pa'i phyir ro for 'gro ba yang skye ba dgag pa kho na
bzhin du dgag pas 'gro ba bkag pa'i phyir ro.
Also of interest is the immediately following sentence in which Bhāviveka
addresses and rejects the opponent's suggestion that this specific reason be
accepted as unspecified in terms of being surface-level or ultimate, i.e., be considered
to be of a general nature so that it might be established for both sides of the debate.
He rejects the proposal on the ground that since 1) there could not be a positive
concomitance and 2) any positive concomitance could occur only with dissimilar
examples, the reason would turn out to be contradictory: spyi'i rnam pa gnyis ka'i
phyogs la grags pa gtan tshig su rtog (D: rtogs) na yang rjes su 'gro ba med pa’i
phyir dang | mi mthun pa’i phyogs ’ba’ zhig la (D: la de) rjes su 'gro ba’i phyir gtan123
similarly, in regard to the proof that [he him]self (i.e., Bhāviveka) has
formulated (svakṛtasādhana),250 too, [viz.],
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
That which has not been traversed (agata) is indeed not
traversed, because [it] is a path, like a path that has been
traversed,
251
tshigs kyi don 'gal ba nyid (PP D 63b1; P 75b1-76a1). Avalokitavrata explains: spyi'i
rnam pas gnyis ka’i phyogs la grags pa gtan tshig su rtog na yang zhes bya bas ni 'di
skad bstan te gal te skye bar smra ba dag 'di skad ces khyed dbu ma pa la yang kun
rdzob tu skye ba dang ’ong ba dag yod par grub la | kho bo cag la yang don dam par
skye ba dang 'gro ba dang 'ong ba dag yod par grub pas de’i phyir spyi’i rnam pas
gnyi ga'i phyogs la grags pa'i gtan tshig yod pas | kho ba cag gi gtan tshigs de dag gi
(P: gis) yul dang ldan pa'i tha snyad byed pa'i phyir ro zhes bya ba de gtan tshigs yin
par rtog go zhes zer na | de yang mi rung bar ston to || gal te de ltar rtog na ci’i phyir
mi rung zhe na | de'i phyir rjes su 'gro ba med pa'i phyir zhes bya ba smras te | gal te
de ltar rtog na de la yang khyod la don dam par skye ba dang 'gro ba dang 'ong ba
dag yod par sgrub (P: bsgrub) pa'i gtan tshigs dang sgrub pa'i rjes su 'gro ba'i dpe
med pa'i phyir | khyed kyi gtan tshig kyi don 'gal ba nyid kyis skyon chags pa yin pas
mi rung ngo | gal te de ltar (D: lta) na gtan tshigs kyi don de dpe ma tshang ba nyid
yin no zhes brjod par bya ba yin gyi | 'gal ba nyid ces brjod par mi bya'o (P: ||) zhe na
de'i phyir mi mthun pa'i phyogs 'ba' shig la de rjes su 'gro ba'i phyir gtan tshigs
|
kyi don 'gal ba nyid do zhes bya ba smras so 'di skad bstan te kun rdzob kyi gtan
tshigs kyi sbyor ba gang yin pa de ni don dam pa'i mi mthun pa’i phyogs kun rdzob
'ba' zhig la rjes su 'gro ba'i phyir | des na kun rdzob kho nar skye ba la sogs pa dag
yod par sgrub (P: bsgrub) pa yin pas de'i phyir khyed don dam par 'gro ba la sogs pa
yod par 'dod pa nyams pas gtan tshigs kyi don 'gal ba nyid yin no || (PPȚ D 221a2-7;
P 257b6-258a5).
250 *LT's author identifies the person referred to as Bhāviveka: svakṛteti
bhāvivekakṛtam (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 123, 137 [fol. 2a6]).
251 The inference appears in the PP commentary on MMK II.1b which reads agatam
naiva gamyate.
PP: ma song ba la ’ang 'gro ba med de (D: without de) | lam yin pa’i phyir song ba’i
lam bzhin no zhes bya bar dgongs so || (D 63a3; P 76a3-4; translated in Ames 1995:
302). Bhāviveka asserts that Nāgārjuna initially stated gatam na gamyate tāvat
(MMK II.1a) because this provides an example that is accepted by others. Bhāviveka
briefly comments on II.1a: de la 'gro ba'i bya ba 'das zin pa'i phyir ro || don de ni
gzhan dag la yang (P: without yang) grags pas bsgrub par mi bya'o ||, and adds: de
smos pa ni gzhan 'dod pa'i dpe nyid du bzhed pa'i phyir ro || (D 63b2; P 76a2-3). “A
path that has been traversed” is accordingly employed as the example for Bhāvi-
veka's inference which takes MMK II.1b as its thesis, and the property of "that
which has been traversed” (gatam) of MMK II.1a, namely, “being a path,” is used as
its reason.124
the [logical fault of] non-establishment of the reason "[it] is a path"
(adhvatva) from [his] (= Bhāviveka's) own [point of view] is
applicable.
TRANSLATION
§53. The [logical fault of] non-establishment of the reason and so
forth just from [one's] (= Bhāviveka's) own [point of view] is
applicable in regard to the [following] statements:
It is not the case, ultimately, that an engaged (sabhāga) visual
[faculty] sees visible form (rūpa), because [it] is a visual faculty,
just as an unengaged (tatsabhāga) [visual faculty does not see
visible form].252
De La Vallée Poussin (PSP₁ 32.7) conjectures that paramārthato should be added to
the text of the PSP citation of this inference, but it does not appear in the PP or PPT,
and there is no reason for its inclusion since it is accepted on the surface level that
what has not been traversed is untraversed. PsP Tib's translators presumably
encountered the (interpolated) word in one of their manuscripts. Stcherbatsky (1927:
115 and n. 3), although his literal translation in his footnote appears to catch the
meaning of the proposition, misunderstands the argument as a critique of time as a
real entity.
252 The inference is presented by Bhāviveka in the PP as part of his commentary on
MMK III.2cd.
PP: don dam par brten pa mtshungs pa’i mig ni gzugs la lta bar mi byed de | mig gi
dbang po yin pa'i phyir dper na de dang mtshungs pa bzhin no || (D 76b7-77al; P
92b3; translated in Ames 1986: 96; 2001: 11). On sabhāga and tatsabhāga, see
AKBh ad I.39 and AKBh 1.75-78. AKBh ad I.39d defines a sabhāga entity as that
which performs its own function: yaḥ svakarmakṛt sa sabhāga iti; the text continues:
tatra yena cakṣuṣā rūpāṇy apaśyat paśyati drakṣyati vā tad ucyate sabhāgam cakṣuḥ |
evam yāvan manaḥ svena viṣayakāritreṇa vaktavyam (AKBhed 28.2-4; AKBhĖ¡ 43.23-
25). The visual faculty that is tatsabhāga is reported as considered by the Kashmiris
to be of four types, viz., the visual faculty that, not having seen visibles, has perished,
perishes or will perish, and the visual faculty that is destined not to arise (tatsabhā-
gam cakṣuḥ kāśmīrāṇāṁ caturvidham | yad adṛṣṭvā rūpāṇi niruddham nirudhyate
nirotsyate vā yac cānutpattidharmi [AKBhed 28.4-5; AKBhå¡ 43.26-27]); the
"Westerners" add a fifth type based on their dichotomizing of the type "destined not
to arise" depending on whether the faculty is connected with consciousness or not.
Unlike the other sense faculties, the manas that has, is, or will arise invariably has an
object, that is, it cannot arise and perish without having grasped its ālambana, and
thus the tatsabhāgo manas can only be a manas destined not to arise. Cox (1988: 73,
n. 17) remarks: “A distinction between homogeneous (sabhāga) and partially homo-
genous (tatsabhāga) sense organs and object-fields was developed in order to
distinguish those that have functioned, are functioning, or will function in a momentPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
125
Similarly,
It is not the case that the visual [faculty] perceives visible form
(rupa), because [visible form] is derived from the elements
(bhautikatvāt), like the [visual faculty's] own form (svarūpa) [is
derived from the elements and is not seen by it].253
of perception (i.e., homogeneous), from those that do not so function, but are never-
theless of the same nature as those that do (i.e., partially homogeneous)." The words
sabhāga and tatsabhāga are explained as follows: sabhāga iti ko 'rthaḥ
indriyaviṣayavijñānām anyonyabhajanam kāritrabhajanam vā bhāgaḥ | sa eṣām astīti
sabhāgaḥ | sparśasamānakāryatvād vā | ye punar asabhāgās te teṣām sabhāgānām
jātisāmānyena sabhāgatvāt tatsabhāgāḥ || (AKBhed 28.22-24; AKBhå; 44.24-45.3)
"What is the meaning of sabhāga? bhāga means the mutual serving of sense faculty,
object and cognition; or, [it means] partaking in an activity. [Thus, the bahuvrihi] sa-
bhāga means: they have that [bhāga]. Or, because they have the common result of
contact. But those which do not have that bhāga (asabhāga), because they are similar
(sabhāga) to those having that bhāga (sabhāga) by way of the commonality which
consists in their class (jātisāmānya) (i.e., they belong to the same dhātu), are similar
to them (tatsabhāga)"; see also the further comments at AKVy 77.2-12. PP presents
the translation equivalents brten pa mtshungs pa and de dang mtshungs pa, while PsP
Tib attests brten pa dang bcas pa and de dang mtshungs pa. I do not think that de
mthun mthun YSV's sentence dmigs pa ni chos thams cad de mthun (v.1. om.)
mthun du sbyar ro (YȘVed 66.1-2) should be interpreted as intending de mthun
(tatsabhāga) and mthun (sabhāga) (cf. YṢV 225, n. 410). de is probably intended as
a semi-final particle and (mthun) mthun du sbyar may translate yathāyogam (cf. Negi
1998: 2115); thus "ālambana are all dharmas, respectively corresponding [as regards
the individual inner āyatanas]." For Yogācāra definitions of sabhāga and tatsabhāga,
see Schmithausen 2014 § 63.4.
*LT's author explains sabhāga and tatsabhāga thus: sabhāgam savyāpāram
savijñānakam ity arthaḥ | tatsabhāgam avyāpāram (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 123, 137
[fol. 2a6]).
253 The inference is presented by Bhāviveka as MHK III.41ab: na cakṣuḥ prekṣate
rūpam bhautikatvāt svarūpavat |. Skt in Lindtner 2001: 11, Heitmann 2009: 57; Skt
and Tib in Ejima 1980: 278f.; Iida 1980: 107; English translation in Iida 1980: 107. I
understand the dharmin for the inference to be visible form (rūpa), and the dharma to
be "not seen by the faculty of vision." I assume that Iida (1980: 107) intends the same
with his (not, however, unambiguously formulated) translation "The eye does not
behold form, since it has the nature of production from the elements, just as its
[eye's] own form." Note that the TJ's author explicitly designates visible form as the
dharmin. The further reason sukhādyutpattihetutvāt and the example rasādivat both
clearly point to visible form being the dharmin (note that visible form is the dharmin
in the preceding verse MHK III.40).126
TRANSLATION
The author of the TJ clearly appears to understand svarūpa of the example to be
referring to the fleshy eyeball (māmsapinda) which is, according to the AKBh,
actually the support (adhisthāna) of the visual faculty (cakṣurindriya). He describes
the own-form of the eye as blue like the petal of a lotus, covered with beautiful black
eyelashes, etc., a rather unusual interpretation of svarūpa which, by implication,
could suggest that cakṣus of the proposition ought also be interpreted as referring to
the eyeball, here metaphorically considered as that which sees. However, such an
interpretation seems forced, given that the first pāda of the immediately preceding
kārikā, MHK III.40ab, presents a similar proposition and expressly mentions, as the
means of seeing, the visual faculty (na cakṣurindriyagrāhyam rūpam hi paramārtha-
taḥ). Although the word cakṣus is also employed in Buddhist texts to refer to the
fleshy eyeball, in contexts where sense perception is dealt with it is used almost
exclusively to designate the visual faculty (cp. the explicit clarification in AKVy [re:
AKBh ad AK 1.35c] in response to an opponent who argues by way of a sūtra
statement which glosses cakṣus with māmsapinda that the cakṣurindriya is hard and
thus made of primary matter; AKVy 66.31-33: tena cakṣurindriyeṇāvinirbhāgavarti-
no 'dhiṣṭhānasya etad vacanam | bhavati hi cakṣuradhiṣṭhāne 'pi cakṣurupacāraḥ |
ata eva māmsapinda iti grahaṇam | anyathā cakṣuṣīty evāvakṣyat yadīndriyam
eveșyate). This slightly disturbing interpretation in the TJ becomes suspect when
compared with Bhāviveka's commentary on MMK III.2 (III.2: svam ātmānam
darśanam hi tat tam eva na paśyati | na paśyati yad ātmānam katham drakṣyati tat
parān). Bhāviveka understands darśana of the kārikā to be designating the faculty of
vision, glossing it with mig gi dbang po (*cakṣurindriya), used alternatively
throughout the chapter with mig (*cakṣus); he further glosses rang gi bdag nyid
(*svātman) of MMK III.2ab with rang gi ngo bo nyid (*svarūpa) (cf. D 76a3; P 91b3)
but never explicates the own-form of the eye in a way that might lead one to assume
that the eyeball is being referred to. Especially revealing is the opponent's statement
in which the own-form referred to in MMK III.2 and in Bhāviveka's various
inferences in support of the kārikā's assertion is explicitly indicated to be the own-
form of the non-visible faculty: “It is correct that the visual faculty does not see itself,
because it is invisible (bstan du med pa; *anidarśana), but visible form is visible
(bstan du yod pa; nidarśana); therefore, [the faculty of vision] sees it" (mig rang gi
bdag nyid la lta [P: blta] bar mi byed pa ni bstan du med pa yin pa’i phyir rung mod
kyi | gzugs ni bstan du yod pa yin pas de’i phyir de la lta [P: blta] bar byed do zhe zer
ro || [D 76b3-4; P 92a5-6]) and Bhāviveka's reply in which he agrees that the visual
faculty does not see itself because it is invisible (on his reply, see Ames 1986: 95;
2001: 10). Nowhere in the rather extensive discussion does he refer to cakṣurindriya
not seeing its support, the māṇsapinda. The apparent disharmony between TJ and
MHK, the obvious discrepancy between TJ and PP, and the general agreement
between PP and MHK on the referent of svatman/svarūpa, is possibly one more piece
of internal evidence in support of the hypothesis that at least part of the TJ was
authored by a Buddhist scholar other than Bhāviveka. Helmut Krasser suggests that
the "author" was a student of Bhāviveka’s, and that the “student-level" explanations
of the elements of inferences, the discrepancies between the PP and TJ, and thePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
127
Earth (mahi) does not have the own-being of something solid
(kharasvabhāva), because it is an element (bhūtatvāt), like wind
254
(anila).
references in the TJ to the “ācārya" can be explained on this basis. See Krasser 2011
and 2012a: 569ff.
Hopkins (1983: 520 and n. 445) translates the example following PsP Tib's dper na
gzugs bzhin: “as, for example, is the case with form." He notes, however, referring to
de Jong's correction of the Sanskrit text from rūpavat to svarūpavat, that "the
Tibetan would be better translated as rang gzugs bzhin." He nevertheless understands
rang gzugs bzhin as "like its form,' meaning the form that the eye sees."
254 The inference appears as MHK III.27ab. Skt in Lindtner 2001: 10, Heitmann
2009: 55; Skt and Tib in Ejima 1980: 274f.; cf. also Iida 1980: 90. Although not
relevant to the immediate PsP discussion, it might again be noted that the commen-
tator's remarks regarding MHK III.27 seem to misrepresent the kārikā, or at least fail
to clarify its intent. The kārikā consists of two reasonings: 1) 3.27ab: kharasvabhāvā
na mahī bhūtatvāt tadyathānilaḥ, 2) 3.27cd: dhāraṇam na bhuvaḥ kāryam kṛtakatvād
yathambhasaḥ. The commentator states, “Because it has been taught in the world and
in the treatises of the Abhidharma, etc., that the characteristic of earth is solidi-
ty/hardness and that earth upholds, in order to refute these, a two-fold proof has been
brought forth: 1) because there does not exist something called “earth” separate from
water and fire and air, that is, [because] it is not possible in any way whatsoever to
teach the characteristic of earth separately from those [other elements] which take the
form of a composite and 2) [because] the specific function is also like that. There-
fore, it is not something that has an own-form.” (’jig rten dang chos mngon la sogs
pa'i bstan bcos las sa'i mtshan nyid ni sra ba nyid yin pa la sa ni brtan par byed par
bstan pas de dag dgag pa’i phyir tshad ma rnam pa gnyis nye bar bkod de || gang gi
phyir chu dang me dang rlung las logs shig na sa zhes bya ba 'ga' yang yod pa ma
yin te 'dus pa'i ngo ba nyid dag las sa'i mtshan nyid logs shig tu bkar te bstan par ni
ji ltar yang mi nus la | las kyi bye brag kyang de bzhin pas de’i phyir ngo bo nyid yod
pa ma yin no || [cf. Iida 1980: 90]). In both reasonings in the kārikā, Bhāviveka, as in
kārikā 3.41ab, uses a generic property of the subject as the logical reason in order to
override and disallow a specific property of the subject, a rather nasty but logically
impeccable mode of procedure. The author of the TJ announces a two-fold proof but
actually presents a single proof and applies it to both of the kārikā reasonings. His
argument, i.e., that earth cannot be talked about as something separate from the other
three elements, can be linked with the reason in the second argument inasmuch as
earth atoms, or more precisely, earth molecules, are only such when solidity (i.e.,
earth) occurs together with the seven other "qualities" (see AK II.22 and
commentary; Frauwallner 1958: 96f.), and must come together with other earth
molecules in order to perform the function of upholding, but this seems more an
independent reasoning than a clarification of the specific kārikā argument. His
relating of his reasoning to the first kārikā argument seems inappropriate, for the
reason kṛtakatvāt occurs only in the second. His complete silence as regards the128
TRANSLATION
§54. And this reason, "because [they] are [already] existing" (sattvāt),
[of the inference put forth by Bhāviveka to prove non-arising from
self] is inconclusive (anaikāntika) from the [point of view of the
Sankhya] opponent,255 [who will point to the fault with the following
question:] "Would the internal bases, because [they] are [already]
existing, like consciousness (caitanyavat), not arise from self (svataḥ)
or would they arise from self, like a pot and so forth?"⁹256
§55. If [Bhāviveka retorts that] there is not inconclusiveness because
a pot and so forth are also similar to the probandum (sādhyasama)257
reason bhūtatvāt in the first argument is quite odd. Both the want of explanatory
precision and what appears to be the overlaying of a corollary argument may once
again speak for independent authorship of these comments in the TJ.
255 De La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 33, n. 4) reconstructs gtan tshigs 'di yang pha rol po’i
ltar na | ... | zhes ma nges pa yin no as hetur ayam api pakṣavādinaḥ pakṣe | kim ... | iti
na niścitaḥ. I doubt that the mss on which the PsP Tib is based read any differently
than the Skt as it has been transmitted. Tibetan 'di, unlike Sanskrit ayam, naturally
follows its noun, yang translates ca, and the translators have merely clarified the
meaning of parataḥ by adding Itar na to pha rol po; ma nges pa is the usual PsP
translation for anaikāntika.
256 The reason is inconclusive because it occurs in both similar cases (sapakṣa) and
dissimilar cases (vipakṣa). Bhāviveka intends the reason sattvāt in the sense of
"existing already and therefore not requiring arising," a property found in the
example caitanya which exists eternally and is thus without a time of arising. While
the Sankhya opponent holds, on the one hand, that caitanya does not arise because it
exists (in this case the reason would prove non-arising from self, the sādhya), he also
maintains that a pot and so forth, which already exist in unmanifest form, do arise;
and with this meaning of existing, i.e., existing_but_requiring manifestation, the
reason proves arising from self, the opposite of the sādhya.
257 When the Sankhya adduces pot, etc., as instances of things which, according to
him, arise from self and thus, in belonging to the class of dissimilar cases (vipakṣa),
reveal the inconclusiveness of the reason, Bhāviveka defends his reason by claiming
that this example “pot, etc.,” is in the same situation as that which is to be proved:
pot, etc., like the inner bases, do not arise from self and therefore, contrary to what
the Sānkhya claims, belong to the class of corresponding cases (sapakṣa). Stcher-
batsky (1927: 117), interpreting sādhyasama in the passage as equivalent to petitio
principii, translates: “It may be objected (that the adduced example, the identity of
matter in physical objects) like jars etc., is a petitio principii and therefore the
argument is not uncertain, (but wrong)"; on the inappropriateness of the translation
petitio principii for sādhyasama, see Bhattacharya 1974 (Bhattacharya quotes and
discusses the present PsP passage on pp. 226-228. I cannot, however, make any sensePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
129
[i.e., their situation is the same as the inner bases given that they do
not arise from self], [we reply that] this is not so, because [you] did
not formulate [your inference] that way.
258
§56. [Objection:] Yet is it not the case, given that the faulting
(dūṣaṇa) as it has been expressed in regard to the opponent's (=
Bhāviveka's) inferences entails equally for [one's] own inferences
(svānumāna), that exactly the [same] fault (doșa)-such as [the
logical fault that the proposition is] unestablished with respect to its
locus (asiddhādhāra) and [the logical fault that] the reason is
unestablished (asiddhahetu) obtains [for you too]? And therefore,
since "And one [party] should not be criticized (codya) for that which
is a fault of both,"259 all this faulting (dūṣaṇa) turns out to be
inappropriate.
of his statement, "The principle of sadhyasama can be succesfully employed only by
a prāsangika, not by a svātantrika” [1974: 227]); Matilal 1974 (= 1985: 45-58; minor
editorial changes in 1985); Bhattacharya et al. 1986: 112, n. 3. Seyfort Ruegg has
commented on sādhyasama in a number of articles and books; see, e.g., 1981: 22, n.
49; 1983: 210, n. 14; and, more recently, his remarks on sādhyasama in 2000: 124, n.
25 (note also the references in 2002: 64, n. 77). Other general illustrations of the fault
sādhyasama may be found in Buddhapālita’s commentary on MMK IV.8 and in
Avalokitavrata's tīkā to PP's commentary on the same. Buddhapālita declares the
case of threads adduced by the opponent to prove that cloth is not empty to be
sādhyasama because exactly the same reasons that prove that cloth is empty prove
that threads are empty (cf. BP ed 64.7-14; BP 64). sādhyasama is employed as a
technical term for a logical fault of the hetu within the Nyaya school; it is defined at
NS I.2.8: sādhyāvisiṣṭaś ca sādhyatvāt sādhyasamaḥ. On sādhyasama as a
hetvābhāsa see, e.g., Matilal 1974; Preisendanz 1994: 176f. Tillemans (1990: 278, n.
379), in reliance on Tibetan exegesis, considers CŚ XIII.5cd and Candrakīrti's
commentary on it to be focussed on the fallacy of sādhyasama as set forth in NS
I.2.8.
tr
258 The svata evānumāna that Candrakīrti draws out of Buddhapalita's prasanga
statement has pot, etc., as its subject, i.e., all the things claimed by the Sankhya to
manifest from self; the inference therefore cannot be suspected of having an
inconclusive reason because there is no dissimilar case the Sankhya might bring forth
as having the property of existing and nevertheless arising from self. See §31. *LT's
author explains tathānabhidhānāt with ghaṭādīty anabhidhānāt | adhyātmikānīty
abhidhānāc ca ||; cf. Yonezawa 2004: 123, 138 [fol. 2a7].
259 De La Vallée Poussin drops the manuscripts' ca of cobhayor and thus presents
Candrakīrti as paraphrasing, and not citing, the nyāya “yaś cobhayor doṣo na
tenaikaś codyo bhavati." For references, see PSP₁ 34, n. 1. Candrakīrti cites the nyāya130
Reply: This fault (doșa) occurs for those voicing an independent
inference (svatantram anumānam). We do not employ an independent
inference, because our inferences (anumāna) result in the negation of
the opponent's thesis.260 To explain: The opponent (para) considers
that the visual faculty sees. He is rebuffed by way of an inference
261
TRANSLATION
again at PSP₁ 172.11. Cp. ŚV on śūnyavāda verse 252: tasmād yatrobhayor doṣaḥ
parihāro 'pi vā samaḥ | naikaḥ paryanuyoktavyas tādṛgarthavicāraṇe ||.
=
26⁰ Both Yotsuya and Seyfort Ruegg integrate Tib's tsam, which is not found in Skt
but could possibly be assumed as implied by it, into their translations. Yotsuya
(1999: 65): “... since the effect of our reasoning is merely to negate the assertion of
[our] opponent." Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 64) appears to suggest that the Skt should be
emended on the basis of Tib: "But we [Prāsangika Madhyamikas] formulate (prayuj-
sbyor ba) no autonomous inference, for our inferences issue solely in negation of
an opponent's thesis (parapratijñāniṣedha<mātra>phalatvād asmadanumānānām:
gžan gyi dam bca' 'gog pa tsam gyi 'bras bu can)" (cf. also 2000: 136). None of the
manuscripts attest mātra, and consideration of it at this point in the argumentation
may be premature. Note that Candrakīrti makes known that his opponent-acknow-
ledged inferences bring out only the negation of the opponent's thesis in the next
paragraph (etāvanmātram asmadanumānair udbhāvyate). It seems that the sentence
leading up to the exemplified paraprasiddhānumāna (i.e., na vayam svatantram anu-
mānam prayuñjmahe parapratijñāniṣedhaphalatvād asmadanumānānām) intends
merely to state that a paraprasiddhānumāna aims at and is capable of refuting the
opponent's thesis. The fact that it does not do more than this (and does not require
Candrakīrti's acknowledgment of the pakṣa, hetu, etc.) is asserted only with etāvan-
matram asmadanumānair udbhāvyate.
or pra-
Yotsuya's commentary (1999: 65-66) as regards the logical faults Candrakīrti is re-
jecting as incurred by his own inferences should be expanded to include asiddhahetu.
prasangāpādana and svata evānumāna / paraprasiddhānumāna are misleadingly
equated/conflated in Seyfort Ruegg 1981: 79 and 1991: 289 (in both cases there is
reference to the present passage) but differentiated in Seyfort Ruegg 2000 (cf., e.g.,
282f., 286; though see also 251, where employment of paraprasiddhānumāna is
called “the technique known to the Mādhyamika as prasangāpādana
sangāpatti ... - and defined in the PPMV (pp. 24 and 34) as simply resulting in the
negation of another's thesis ..." ). prasangas and paraprasiddhānumānas are of
course for Candrakīrti quite different, the main difference being, as mentioned
earlier, that pakṣadharmată does not apply to the reasons in prasangas (see also
Yotsuya 1999: 76, n. 10 and 88, n. 58).
261 De La Vallée Poussin emends the reading paraḥ cakṣuḥ paśyatīti pratipannaḥ as
found in his three mss to param cakṣuḥ paśyatīti pratipannaḥ, an emendation he
admits is not supported by Tib's gzhan mig Ita’o zhes bya bar rtog pa (cf. PsP₁ 34, n.
5). Note that Tib does translate the four instances of Skt's paradarśana (referring to
the visual faculty seeing what is other) in the following sentences of the samePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
131
acknowledged exclusively by him[self] (tatprasiddhenaivānu-
mānena): [Madhyamika:] You maintain²6² that the visual faculty has
the property (dharma) of not seeing itself (svātmādarśana), and it is
accepted that [the property of not seeing oneself] is invariably
paragraph each time as gzhan la lta ba. Mss P and B attest paraś cakṣuḥ paśyatīti (the
other paper mss, except for ms G which presents para, attest paraḥ for paras). I
reject de La Vallée Poussin's emendation and ms Q's reading param, which appears
at first sight to support the emendation, because I understand paraḥ as the
grammatical subject for the active transitive past participle pratipannaḥ, a subject
referred back to by the anaphoric sa commencing the following sentence and by tat
in the compound tatprasiddhenaivānumānena of the same sentence. If Ms Q's
reading is accepted, pratipannaḥ is left subjectless (one might expect in place of
pratipannaḥ neuter pratipannam, referring to the nominalized iti statement), and it
becomes difficult to determine the referent of the following masculine nominative sa.
The reading paras found in mss P and B (and paraḥ in all but Q) is further supported
by the fact that the distinction of the object of the visual faculty into self (svātman)
and other (para) becomes topical only during the demonstration of the refutation of
the opponent's position, i.e., in the sentences which follow. The argument
commences with the opponent maintaining without specification that the eye sees;
the Madhyamika then refutes this view by introducing and using the distinction to his
advantage. Cf. PsP on MMK III.1 where the object of darśana/cakṣu is given in a
general sense as rūpa: iha hi paśyatīti darsanam caksuh | tasya ca rūpam
viṣayatvenopadisyate (PsP₁ 113.7-8); in MMK III.2 and in PsP on the same kārikā it
is the Madhyamika, not the opponent, who bifurcates the object, and this for the sake
of refuting the opponent's view.
Vaidya (1960b: 11.7-8) does not comment on de La Vallée Poussin's emendation,
but silently emends the text to read paraḥ cakṣuḥ paśyatīti pratipannaḥ |. Hopkins
(1983: 836, n. 450), noting Vaidya's emendation, reports that the "Four Interwoven
Commentaries on (Tsong kha pa's) Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path" also
assumes paraḥ and indicates that it refers to opponents. Seyfort Ruegg (2000: 248;
2002: 65) presumably relies on PSP₁: "... "The eye sees an other' ….. .
66
""
262 De Jong (1978: 32) reads icchadbhi in ms D and, considering this reading as
confirmed by Tib (mig la rang gi bdag nyid mi lta ba'i chos kyang 'dod la | gzhan la
lta¹ ba'i chos med na ni mi 'byung ba nyid du yang khas blangs pa yin te), emends to
icchadbhiḥ; ¹I emend to mi lta (see next note). However, the final akṣara of ms D's
"icchadbhi," ink-blurred as it is, could equally be read as si; mss P and Q and the
other paper mss attest icchasi. It should also be noted that the previous sentence
presents the opponent in the singular (para, sa). Tib's la ('dod la) more likely
represents the addition of the translators than the indication of a case marker (note
that the translators appear to have intended the repeated particle kyang
yang in the
sense of "on the one hand ... on the other"; Skt attests only a single ca). De Jong's
emendation fails to take the ca in cāngīkṛtam into account; if the Skt is emended as
he suggests, ca no longer makes sense grammatically or semantically in the sentence.132
TRANSLATION
connected (avinābhāvitva) with the property of not seeing [what is]
other [than oneself] (parādarśana).² 263 Therefore, [Exemplification:]
26³ The fact that the compound paradarśanadharmāvinābhāvitvam as found in all the
Sanskrit manuscripts is reflected without distortion in all five versions of the Tibetan
translation as gzhan la lta ba’i chos med na mi 'byung ba nyid may indicate that
paradarśana is the result of an error that had occurred in the Sanskrit manuscript
tradition already prior to the Tibetan translation, although one expects that Pa tshab
and Mahāsumati, the latter praised as a great logician in the PsP colophon, would
have noticed the problem. The particle tasmāt introducing the inference indicates that
the inference is built upon the two preceding states of affairs, both of which are
accepted by the opponent. The property (dharma) unconditionally accepted by the
opponent, namely, the visual faculty's not seeing itself (to be used as the reason in
the inference) having been stated, the property generally accepted as invariably
occurring with the former property, namely, not seeing other things (to be used as the
probandum), is stated, and it is on account of the fact that the opponent accepts both
of these properties and their relationship (thus the word tasmāt) that the inference can
be formulated. The negation na in the inference's sādhya, i.e., paradarśanam api
nāsti, also expects the reading parādarśanadharmāvinābhāvitvam. Previous trans-
lators have attempted to work with the corrupt reading paradarśanaº, most consider-
ing the opponent to be maintaining that there is an invariable connection between
"not seeing itself" and "seeing other." The opponent does not, however, maintain
such an invariable connection when it comes to his belief that the visual faculty sees,
and is only made aware of the connection between not seeing oneself and not seeing
others by way of the inference acknowledged by himself (svaprasiddhānumāna); the
faultiness of his belief that the visual faculty sees is thus brought to light via the
inference that contradicts it. Stcherbatsky (1927: 118) understands, as indicated, the
opponent to be erroneously maintaining an invariable connection between the
attributes "not seeing itself” and “seeing other," but with this interpretation feels
forced to translate and supplement tasmāt with "Now, (we will assail it by a counter-
argument)" (Rizzi [1988: 40] follows Stcherbatsky closely; Sprung's [1979: 41f.]
translation, made in reliance on PsP₁, is problematic). Seyfort Ruegg's (2002: 65)
interpretation is similar to Stcherbatsky's, and deals with the faulty text by adding
material in square brackets: “In this way, having supposed (pratipanna: rtog pa) [the
proposition] 'The eye sees an other' [i.e. visible matter (rūpa) such as the blue, even
though it does not see itself] <[the Substantialist opponent] is confuted (nirākriyate)
by just the inference acknowledged by him[self] (tatprasiddhenâivânumānena
nirākriyate)>; and they who maintain [also (kyan)] the quality of [the eye's] not
seeing itself ... [on the other hand still] accept (angīkṛ- ...) a regular concomitance
with the quality [of the eye's] seeing an other (paradarśanāvinābhāvitva ...) [e.g., the
blue]. Therefore, [in reply, Nāgārjuna has advanced the following formal probative
inference in MK iii.2:] ..." (similarly translated in 2000: 248f.). Aware that
Nāgārjuna does not in MMK III.2 explicitly assert the inference set forth above,
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 65, n. 81) explains that Candrakīrti “unpacks” MMK III.2's
inference in his commentary on the kārikā (cf. PsP₁ 114.1-2). It should be noted thatPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
133
Wherever there is not the seeing of oneself there is also not the seeing
of [what is] other [than oneself], as in the case of a pot, [which does
not see itself or what is other than itself]. [Application:] And [it] is [a
fact that] the visual faculty does not see itself; [Conclusion:]
Therefore, it also certainly does not see [what is] other [than itself].
And thus the seeing of [what is] other [than itself,] such as blue, etc.,
since it is contradicted by not seeing itself,265 is controverted by way
of an inference acknowledged exclusively by [him]self (= the
opponent) (svaprasiddhenaivānumānena).
264
although the reason Candrakīrti posits for MMK III.2's inference, namely, because of
not seeing itself, is the same as the one he sets forth here, the example adduced there
is the auditory faculty, etc. (śrotrādi). The fact that Candrakīrti changes the verb
form from second person present icchasi to passive past participle angīkṛta might
also provide some, albeit much weaker, support for the emendation. The opponent is
directly addressed regarding the property he without hesitation affirms (icchasi),
while the statement of the invariable connection is construed with the impersonal
past participle (angīkṛta); the impersonal form relates primarily to the opponent, but
(if not merely added for stylistic reasons) may also be intended to include all
reasonable persons, among whom the opponent will include himself, who accept the
general connection of the attribute of not seeing oneself with the attribute of not
seeing others. Seyfort Ruegg's (2002: 65, n. 80) assertion that the words he translates
in pointed brackets are not found in the Tibetan is incorrect; the PsP Tib translators
simply relocated tatprasiddhenaivānumānena nirākriyate (minus eva) to the end of
the section (de'i phyir ... sngon po la sogs pa gzhan la lta ba rang la grags pa'i rjes
su dpag pa dang 'gal ba yin no || zhes de la grub pa’i rjes su dpag pas sel bar byed pa
yin no ||). Hopkins (1983: 524) appears to have overseen that med na mi 'byung ba
nyid is the translation for the technical term avinābhāvitvam and translates literally,
adding "then that an eye sees" in square brackets to bring some sense to the passage:
"You assert that an eye [has] the attribute of not seeing its own entity and also assert
that if it does not have the attribute of [inherently] seeing other [forms such as blue,
then that an eye sees] just does not occur."
264 Cf. MMK III.2: svam ātmānam darśanam hi tat tam eva na paśyati na paśyati yad
ātmānam katham drakṣyati tat parān ||, and Candrakīrti's commentary on the kārikā,
as well as CŚ XIII.16: svabhāvaḥ sarvabhāvānāṁ pūrvam ātmani dṛśyate | grahaṇam
cakṣuṣaḥ kena cakṣuṣaiva na jāyate ||, and Candrakīrti's commentary (Skt and Tib at
CSTed 280f., CŚTTed 92f.; see also CŚT 190).
tr
265 Recall Candrakīrti's earlier statement in regard to the reason in the inference he
draws out of Buddhapālita's prasanga statement, where it is made clear that it is the
reason that brings out the contradiction (§29, end).134
This much [and no more] is brought out by our inferences; how
[could there be] ingress of the fault as stated onto our side (asmat-
pakṣa) so that there would be the same fault [for us]?
TRANSLATION
§57. [Question:] But is there sublation by inference (anumāna-
badhā)266 even by way of an inference acknowledged [only] by one of
the two [parties in the debate] (anyataraprasiddhānumāna)?
[Reply:] There is. That [sublation], however, [is effected] by way of a
reason (hetu) acknowledged only by [one]self (svaprasiddha) (= only
by the opponent), not by way of [a reason] acknowledged by the other
[party] (paraprasiddha) (= the Madhyamika), since [we] look at
[sublation] just from the point of view of the world (lokata eva).267
For [in legal disputes] in the world, on some occasions victory (jaya)
or defeat (parājaya) comes about by virtue of the statement of a
witness (sākṣin) regarded as an authority (pramāṇīkṛta) by [both] the
plaintiff (arthin) and defendant (pratyarthin),268 on [other] occasions
266 As Candrakīrti's following reply shows, the focus remains on the reason (hetu),
the element that brings out the contradiction and thus performs the sublation.
According to the NM, the opponent's inference that is invalidated through
presentation of another inference whose members he also accepts is determined to
have a pseudo proposition (pakṣābhāsa). In addition to the proposition sublated by
inference (actually the fourth type of pakṣābhāsa listed in the NM), the NM lists that
sublated by its own statement (svavacana), by authoritative testimony (āgama), by
what is generally established (prasiddha), and by direct perception (pratyakṣa). See
Tucci 1930: 7 and Katsura 1977: 13. The sublated pseudo proposition develops in the
Nyāya tradition into the sublated pseudo reason (bādhitahetvābhāsa) or pseudo
reason whose object is sublated (bādhitaviṣayahetvābhāsa). The historical develop-
ment of the pakṣābhāsa and bādhitahetvābhāsa is detailed in Preisendanz 1994: 319-
329 (= n. 88).
267 Stcherbatsky (1927: 119 and n. 1) emends eva of lokata eva dṛṣṭatvāt to evam and
translates, "This is what happens in everyday life." All the mss attest eva and Tib's
nyid ('jig rten nyid du mthong ba’i phyir) supports the reading eva. Given that eva
construed with lokataḥ is an adverbial phrase often employed by Candrakīrti and
makes perfect sense here, there is no reason to change the text. Seyfort Ruegg (2002:
66) translates "For it is this that one finds with [the usage of] ordinary folk in the
world." Hopkins (1983: 525), disregarding nyid and possibly influenced by
Stcherbatsky's emendation, translates, "since such is seen in the world.”
268 The qualifications and obligations of witnesses and the examination of witnesses
according to the Dharmaśāstra literature are presented in Kane 1973: 330-354. KanePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
135
[it comes about] uniquely by virtue of one's own [= the defendant's]
statement, but there is neither victory nor defeat by way of the
statement of the other (para) [party, i.e., the plaintiff].269 And just as
[it is] in the world, so [is it] also in reasoning/logic (nyāya), since
worldly procedure (vyavahāra) is made a principle (prastuta) in the
treatises on reasoning/logic (nyāyaśāstra).²
270
(ibid., 292) notes, “Vādin and prativādin generally mean the plaintiff and the defen-
dant, though vādin sometimes means ‘a litigant’ (either the plaintiff or defendant).
'Arthin' (one who seeks the assistance of the court) and abhiyoktṛ (attacker) are
synonyms of vādin, and pratyarthin and abhiyukta (attacked) are synonyms of
prativādin." On the four types of reply (uttara, pratipakṣa) allowed a legal defendant,
see Lariviere 1989: I, 31 and II, 230; Kane 1973: III, 300-302. Cf. the reference to
parājaya in verse 5 of the first chapter of the Nāradasmṛti. A jayapatra (document of
victory) was awarded to the winner of the litigation; cf. verse 43 of the chapter titled
"The Plaint" (bhāṣā) in the Nāradasmṛti (Lariviere states that this chapter appears in
only one of the manuscripts). Lariviere 1989: I, 41: sabhair eva jitaḥ paścād rājñā
śāsyaḥ svaśāstrataḥ | jayine cāpi deyam syād yathāvaj jayapatrakam ||. Lariviere
(ibid., II, 237) translates, “The one whom the judges find guilty must be punished by
the king in accordance with the texts; he must give the appropriate document of
victory to the winner." See also the entry for jayapatra in Sharan 1978: 301.
269 Candrakīrti focusses here on general courtroom procedure according to which,
regardless of the accusation the plaintiff makes of the defendant, it is either the state-
ment of a witness that will decide the case, or the defendant's admission of the
veracity of the accusation or his (truthful) denial of it that will decide it. The plain-
tiff's bare allegation of an offence can never decide the outcome of the case.
Candrakīrti intends parallels between the Madhyamika and the plaintiff and between
the Madhyamika's opponent and the defendant. The Mādhyamika may be the party
setting forth the inference but, like the plaintiff in the courtroom, his own acknow-
ledgement of the statement he utters has no bearing on the outcome of the encounter;
what matters is the opponent's acknowledgement of the limbs of the inference, for,
here in the context of sublation by inference, it is his acknowledgement of them, like
the defendant's admission of the misdemeanor he is charged with, that will bring
about the defeat of the opponent. Cf. verse 32 of the chapter titled "The Plaint"
(bhāṣa) in the Nāradasmṛti: palāyate ya āhūto maunī sākṣiparājitaḥ | svayam
abhyupapannaś ca avasannaś caturvidhaḥ || (Lariviere 1989: I, 37; the commentary
states that these four types of defeated party apply to the party under trial); Lariviere
(ibid., II, 235) translates, “There are four types of defeated parties: one who absconds
when he has been summoned, one who remains silent, one who is defeated by
witnesses, and one who confesses."
270 Yotsuya's (1999: 37) translation from the Tibetan reads, “For it is transactional
usage ('jig rten pa'i tha snyad) that is the topic under discussion in a treatise (bstan
bcos) on [the science of] reasoning (rigs pa).” Worldly practice is, however, the136
§58. And exactly on account of this certain [scholars] have stated,
"There is not sublation by inference due to acknowledgement from
the side of the other (= the proponent) because it is precisely the
acknowledgement of the other [party] (= the opponent) that is sought
to be refuted."271
TRANSLATION
§59. But he (= Dignāga) who considers that “Only that [reason],
however, which expresses what is ascertained for both [parties in the
debate amounts to] proof / a proving element (sādhana) or refutation /
a refuting element (dūṣaṇa), not [one] expressing doubt or what is
established for [merely] one of the two [parties],"272 also ought to
procedure followed, the method assumed in the nyāyaśāstras, and not their topic (see
the meaning "voranschicken, an die Spitze stellen" for the entry pra√ stu in PW).
Note that Candrakīrti, in his critique of Dignāga's view which follows, refers to the
method as nyāya, i.e., a mode of procedure: tenāpi... yathokta eva nyāyo 'bhyupeyaḥ.
Stcherbatsky (1927: 119) also understands prastuta as pointing out the topic:
"because scientific logic is exclusively concerned (with an examination of the princi-
ples which underly [sic] purposive action in common life)." Hopkins (1983: 525)
understands worldly practice as the orientation, and not the topic, of the texts on
logic: "because only the conventions of the world are appropriate in treatises of
logic." Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 67) translates: “for in the science of logic worldly
practice... is relevant (prastuta = skabs su bab pa)."
271
I have not been able to identify the source of the citation or the individual(s) who
propound its point of view. Candrakīrti quotes it as support for his view that the
Madhyamikas do not need to abide by Dignāga's rule that both parties in a debate
must accept the elements of an inference; the two references to "other" (para)
respectively refer to the two individuals involved in a debate. Stcherbatsky (1927:
119) appears to understand both parataḥ and para as referring to the same person
and thus the statement as a whole as stemming from a party in opposition to the view
espoused by Candrakīrti; he translates, “For this very reason some logicians have
maintained that an argument cannot be exploded on the basis of the principle
admitted by the opponent, because it is just these principles, by him admitted, that it
is intended to reject." Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 67) also seems to understand both paras
as referring to the same individual: there is no invalidation of an inference
[solely] by the force of what the opponent acknowledges, for [in debate just as in a
court of law] there exists a desire to reject what an opponent maintains.” Hopkins
(1983: 526) translates the sentence as "There is no harm by inference that is through
the force of being renowned to the other [party] because [we] wish to refute mere
renown to others."
66
272 Candrakīrti is citing from Dignāga's NM. See the NM commentary on kārikā 2
(Tucci 1930: 15; Katsura 1977: 125f., section 2.4). The text of the PVSV in whichPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
137
accept, in accordance with worldly establishment, the procedure
(nyāya) exactly as it has been stated ²73 [above by me]. 274
1273
this statement of Dignāga's is cited attests (similar to PsP) nānyataraprasiddha
instead of nānyatarāprasiddhaᵒ: ya eva tūbhayaniścitavācī sa sādhanam, dūṣaṇam
vā, nānyataraprasiddhasamdigdhavācī (see PVSV 153). Katsura (1977: 126) emends
to nānyatarāpraᵒ, apparently on the basis of a negation in the Chinese. PsP Tib
accords with PSP Skt: gang gnyi ga la nges par brjod pa de ni sgrub pa 'am sun 'byin
pa yin gyi gang yang rung ba la grub pa 'am the tshom za ba smra ba ni ma yin no.
Cf. also PS III.12 (Katsura 2009: 160): nānister dūṣaṇam sarvam prasiddhas tu
dvayor api | sādhanam dūṣaṇam vāsti sādhanāpekṣaṇāt punaḥ || (words in Roman re-
constructed from the Tibetan) “Not all [hetus] are refuting elements [of the propos-
ition] on account of the non-acceptance of [their being an attribute of the locus
(pakṣadharmatā)] because [such a reason] requires further proving. But a [reason]
that is accepted by both [parties in a debate] is a proving [element] or a refuting [ele-
ment]." Regarding the reason (un)established for one of the two parties, see Tucci
1930: 14 and n. 24; Katsura 1977: 124; PSV ad PS III.11: gcig la yang bzlog pa ni
mngon par gsal bar smra ba la byas pa nyid lta bu'o (PSVK P 127b8; PSV Kit 481);
Nyāyapraveśa 141: kṛtakatvād iti śabdābhivyaktivādinam praty anyatarāsiddhaḥ; on
the doubtful reason see Tucci 1930: 14 and n. 25; Katsura 1977: 124; PSVK ad PS
III.11: gnyi ga la 'am gcig la the tshom za ba ni dper na me bsgrub par bya ba la du
ba nyid la the tshom za ba lta bu'o (PSVK P 127b8-128a1; PSV Kit 481). Cf. also
Steinkellner 1988.
273 PSP Skt's tenāpi laukikīm vyavasthām anurudhyamānena yathokta eva nyāyo
'bhyupeyaḥ is represented in PsP Tib by des kyang jig rten kyi tha snyad kyi rnam
par gzhag pa la brten nas rjes su dpag pa la ji skad smras pa'i tshul 'di nyid khas
blang bar bya'o. At least one of the two Sanskrit manuscripts relied upon by the
translators must have carried a reading similar to or the same as the one found in our
ms Q, namely, the corrupted āśrityānumānena (āśritya is a correction in Q) for anu-
rudhyamānena, the latter confirmed by ms P and variants of which are found in all of
the paper mss. De La Vallée Poussin (PSP₁ 35.7), unaware of Q's reading, unneces-
sarily adds a conjectured anumāne after anurudhyamānena on the basis of Tib's rjes
su dpag pa la. Note that Tib's sentence also contains tha snyad (vyavahāra) and ’di,
neither of which are accounted for by the Skt available to this study.
L
Yotsuya (1999: 37, n. 41) translates the sentence in reliance on both Sanskrit and
Tibetan but, following the Sanskrit, does not translate PsP Tib's rjes su dpag pa la:
"Even this [person] should base himself on the rules of everyday usage ('’jig rten gyi
tha snyad) and accept this very method mentioned above."
274
Yotsuya’s (1999: 37, n. 41) PsP Tib-based translation of this sentence (“Someone
thinks that [an argument] expressing what is definitely [established] for both parties
is proof (sgrub pa) or refutation (sun 'byin) ...”) and Seyfort Ruegg's section title
("Dignāga on the need for agreement between both parties concerning the terms of
an inference-for-other ...") and the note to his translation indicate that both authors
understood the main topic of the sentence to be the complete inference. As the NM138
§60. For, similarly, sublation by authoritative testimony
(āgamabādhā) is not exclusively [effected] by authoritative testimony
that is acknowledged by both [parties] (ubhayaprasiddha). Rather, [it
is generally accepted that sublation can be effected] also by
[authoritative testimony] acknowledged [only] by [one]self (svapra-
siddha) [i.e., only by the party whose view is being critiqued].275 As
regards inference for oneself (svārthānumāna), on the other hand, in
all cases just [one's] own acknowledgement (svaprasiddhi) is
weightier, not the acknowledgement of both [parties].276 Precisely on
account of this [fact that in each of the above situations it is this own
acknowledgement that is the essential factor, not the acknow-
ledgement of both parties], the stating of [technical] definitions
pertaining to logic (tarkalakṣaṇa) is useless, because the Awakened
TRANSLATION
makes clear, the subject of Dignāga's statement is the reason, not the whole infer-
ence. We see also that Candrakīrti commences the following paragraph with talk of
sublation, which is carried out by the reason (there compared with āgama citations).
275 I translate āgama as “authoritative testimony" because not all of the "texts"
encompassed by the term may have been recorded in writing, i.e., as scripture, and
because of the way Candrakīrti describes āgama (see below §121). The authori-
tative/scriptural citations that are accepted only by the debater one aims to defeat,
and not necessarily by oneself, may be used to undermine the opponent's proposi-
tion. For instance, a Naiyāyika debating with a Buddhist may cite statements
attributed to the Buddha to point out a contradiction between them and a certain tenet
maintained by the Buddhist. āgamabādhā is, of course, a technical term meaning
"sublation by authoritative testimony (/ scripture)” and is not intended here, as Sey-
fort Ruegg (2002: 69) interprets it, as a (non-technical) objective genitive compound
in the meaning of "sublation of scripture” (“Thus a scriptural testimony is invalidated
not only by scriptural testimony ...”).
276 In Dignāga’s system, inference for another is understood as a public announce-
ment focussed on the confirmation of a triply characterized reason, and requires the
acceptance of the reason by both parties, whereas inference for oneself involves a
subjective, private mental act that confirms the truth of a proposition on the basis of a
triply characterized reason, and is not dependent on any opponent's acceptance of the
reason. PS II.1ab: anumānam dvidhā svārtham trirūpāl lingato 'rthadṛk (Skt cited in
Muni Jambuvijayaji 1966: 122). On differences between svārthānumāna and pa-
rārthānumāna according to Dignāga and Dharmakīrti, see, e.g., Tillemans 1984 and
1991.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
139
277
Ones (buddha) aid trainees (vineyajana) unacquainted with them²
(i.e., the technical definitions) by way of reasoning (upapatti) that
conforms to what [they them]selves acknowledge (yathāsvapra-
siddha).278 Enough of this digression; let us [return to] explicating just
the main topic.
§61. Nor do things arise from [something] other (parataḥ), simply
because [something] other does not exist. And [he (= Nāgārjuna)]
will explain this here [in the Madhyamakaśāstra:]
An own-being of things of course does not exist in the conditions
and such.27
279
And thus just because other does not exist, [things] do not arise from
other, either.
"
277 PSP Tib: de kho na mi shes pa'i for tadanabhijñaº; de La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 36,
n. 3) reconstructs atattvajñaº. Hopkins (1983: 526 and n. 457) notes that the Sanskrit
"is merely tadanabhijña 'who do not know that [or those, which could refer to the
definitions']' whereas the Tibetan reads de kho na mi shes pa'i ‘who do not know
suchness""; he refers to Tsong kha pa's presentation of the phrase as "chos kyi de kho
na nyid ma shes pa'i 'who do not know the suchness of phenomena" and (thus?)
translates PSP Tib as "who do not know suchness." It is possible that he is correct in
assuming that the PsP translators understood tat in the meaning of tattva (n. 457), but
since tattva has not been topical, it may be more likely that either 1) the translators
read tat, which they interpreted in the sense of "that,” and added the emphatic parti-
cle kho na (= nyid) so that the anaphoric reference to tarkalakṣaṇa would be clearer
or 2) their manuscript(s) appeared to, or did, read tatva, the result of the akṣara da
(tadanabhijñaᵒ) having been read on account of, possibly, its lower loop having
been written larger than usual, or a mark on the palm leaf having caused the right
opening to appear as closed as tva. This second possibility may be the less probable
one given that Pa tshab usually translates tattva as de kho na nyid.
278
66
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 70) translates the latter part of the sentence as
assistance (anugraha = phan btags pa) comes from the Buddhas (sans rgyas rnams)
by reason of a justified ground in accordance with what is acknowledged by onself”;
the translation of upapatti as “a justified ground" is in the present context not accept-
able. Candrakīrti, here and in other of his works, often uses the word upapatti in the
sense of "reasoning."
279 Candrakīrti cites MMK I.3ab: na hi svabhāvo bhāvānāṁ pratyayādiṣu vidyate |.
Candrakīrti provides two explanations for the kārikā; see below.140
TRANSLATION
Further, the negation of arising from other should be ascertained
through statements such as [the following from the Madhyama-
kāvatāra],280
280
If281 depending on [something] other (anya) [than itself], another
(para) were to come to be, then from fire thick darkness could
arise,
And there would be the birth of everything, and [that] indeed
from everything, because being other (paratva) [than the effect]
is the same (tulya) for every non-producer (ajanaka) as well.²
282
Only ms Q identifies the source of the verse as the MA. Given that ms P and the
paper manuscripts lack the reference, and that the dropping of madhyamakāvatārād
is difficult to explain paleographically, it can be concluded that this second instance
of MA identification also represents an early interpolation. Candrakīrti presumed his
audience's familiarity with his other main work; a later scholar or student of the PSP
must have deemed the identification of the source to be necessary. Unlike the previ-
ous case of an interpolated reference to the MA in Q (see end of PSPM §21) where the
name of the work was written in Q's margin as text to be inserted, in the present case
madhyamakāvatārād is included within Q's main text. The fact that it is included
within Q's main text probably indicates that it was passed on to Q from ms ŉ (see
Stemma), which had received the reading from ms 8 of y's line. PsP Tib's reading
dbu ma la 'jug pa las confirms that madhyamakāvatārād also appeared in one of the
Skt manuscripts used for the translation, but as the analysis of the manuscripts'
variants has demonstrated, this reading probably also goes back to 8. One assumes
that it was originally a marginal reading aid that a scribe wrongly interpreted as ma-
terial needing to be inserted.
De La Vallée Poussin introduces the conjecture madhyamakāvatārāt (in square
brackets) on the basis of Tib's dbu ma la 'jug pa las (see PSP₁ 36 and n. 5). He refers
back to PSP₁ 13 for an earlier reference to the MA that is attested in his three manu-
scripts, but as explained earlier, this specification of the source text for PSP₁ 13.9
(§21) does not appear in ms P and was not in the manuscript used by *LT's author;
see n. 115.
281 *LȚ's author notes that yadi nāma is to be understood as meaning “if,” but adds
yadi nāmeti yadyarthe | nāmābhyupagame vā “or, alternatively, nāma [has been
added] in the sense of signalizing acceptance" (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 123, 138 [fol.
2a7]).
282 MA VI.14: anyat pratītya yadi nāma paro 'bhaviṣyaj jāyeta tarhi bahulaḥ śikhino
'ndhakāraḥ | sarvasya janma ca bhavet khalu sarvataś ca tulyam paratvam akhile
'janake 'pi yasmāt || (Li 2012: 4). Tib at MABh 89.6-7, 15, 19-20: gzhan la brten
nas gal te gzhan zhig ’byung bar 'gyur na ni || 'o na me Ice las kyang mun pa 'thug¹
po 'byung 'gyur zhing || thams cad las kyang thams cad skye bar 'gyur te² gang giPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
141
phyir || skyed par byed pa ma yin ma lus la yang³ gzhan nyid mtshungs || ¹PsP Tib:
mthug; 2PSP Tib (P): te ; ³PsP Tib: 'ang.
Quoted in MABh to MA VI.98ab (MABhed 204.8-11); cf. MABh 1910: 286f. (286,
n. 6: read 'ndhakāraḥ for 'dhakāraḥ). Candrakīrti, in MABh on VI.14ab, cites as
further confirmation for the impossibility of arising from other MMK XX.19cd: rgyu
dang 'bras bu gzhan nyid du || nam yang 'thad par mi 'gyur ro || (XX.19cd Skt: hetoh
phalasya canyatvam na hi jātūpapadyate ||) and MMK XX.20cd: rgyu dang 'bras bu
gzhan nyid na || rgyu dang rgyu min mtshung pas 'gyur || (XX.20cd Skt: pṛthaktve
phalahetvoḥ syāt tulyo hetur ahetunā ||).
De La Vallée Poussin (MABh 1910: 286, n. 6) cites the Sanskrit for MA VI.14 but
in his translation (287) of 14c he translates freely, ignoring the pair of cas and the
word khalu: "Toutes choses naîtraient de toutes choses." My translation reflects my
understanding of 14c as intending to convey two aspects of a consequence of arising
from other. Tilakakalaśa and Pa tshab's translation of MA VI.14c as thams cad las
kyang thams cad skye bar 'gyur te ... may represent a (not entirely successful) attempt
to bring the intent of the Sanskrit into Tibetan verse. Nag tsho's translation of the
MA (which was revised by Pa tshab) presents 14c merely as kun las thams cad skye
bar 'gyur te
(P 229a5). The Tibetan of MABh on 14c has been translated so that it
concurs with the Tibetan translation of the pāda: rgyur gyur pa dang rgyu ma yin par
gyur pa thams cad las kyang dngos po 'bras bur gyur pa dang 'bras bur ma gyur pa
thams cad skye bar 'gyur ro ||. Candrakīrti would appear to elaborate on the two as-
pects he refers to in 14c, however, in the MABh on 14d: yang ji ltar sa (MABhun: sā)
lu’i sa bon gzhan du gyur pa las sa (MABhun: sā) lu’i myu gu skye ba de bzhin du |
me dang sol ba dang nas kyi sa bon la sogs pa dag las kyang 'gyur ro || yang ji ltar sa
(MABhun: sā) lu’'i myu gu (MABhun: gu’i) gzhan du gyur pa sa (MABhun: sā) lu’i sa
bon las 'byung ba de bzhin du bum pa dang snam bu la sogs pa rnams kyang 'gyur ba
zhig na (MABhed 90.4-8); the two yangs respectively commencing each sentence
possibly translate two cas (or two apis) which are meant to correspond to the two cas
of 14c.
Huntington (1989: 158f.) translates the verse: "If one entity arises in dependence on
another, then pitch darkness can arise from a flame. In fact, [if this were the case,
then] anything could arise from anything, because it is not simply [the cause] which
is different from [its effect] - all non-causes as well are different [from that effect]."
Given the structure of 14c and the commentary, it seems that Candrakīrti intends
sarva to be understood in a comprehensive sense as “all, everything,” and the opta-
tive bhavet in a more definite and dynamic sense of "would be / would come to be"
than Huntington's "anything could arise" (for sarvasya janma ca bhavet) allows;
Candrakīrti uses this consequence to demonstrate that arising from other entails total
chaos, not that a pot could arise from a rice seed, but that it and everything else defin-
itely would arise, because the condition of being other is fulfilled. Cp. MA VI.99
where he rejects arising without a cause and clearly states that in a world in which
things arise without a cause, everything would perpetually (rtag tu) arise from
everything: gal te rgyu med kho nar skye bar lta zhig 'gyur na ni | de tshe mtha' dag
rtag tu tham cad las kyang skye 'byung zhing |. While one could alternatively trans-142
§62. The Master Buddhapālita, for his part, asserts:
Things do not arise from other, because of the consequence that
everything would originate from everything.28
TRANSLATION
§63. The Master Bhāviveka voices criticism in regard to this
[statement of Buddhapalita's]:
late the consequence in VI.14b as "from fire thick darkness would arise" (cf. LVPtr
1910: 286: "sans doubte une épaisse obscurité naît de la flame”) in place of my "from
fire thick darkness could arise," my choice of translations for the optatives is based
on my interpretation of the verse as intending, for poetic and dramatic purposes, a
progression from the first consequence to the second: an unwelcome possibility is
presented and then in a second step a stronger, more definite and more devastating
consequence of the opponent's view is set forth.
Candrakīrti devotes a substantial section of the sixth chapter of the MABh to the
refutation of arising from other, chiefly because arising from other is accepted by the
schools of Conservative Buddhism (note that his refution of arising from other
commences with the enumeration and definitions of the four conditions (pratyaya)
maintained by the Sarvāstivāda and Sautrāntika schools [see MABhed 87.15-89.2])
and by the Yogācāra school. Candrakīrti's argumentation against arising from other
in the MABh is too extensive to be included and elucidated here, but mention should
be made of the fact that he couches within it, in the framework of explicating why the
viewpoint of the world (loka) cannot be taken as an authority for proving that things
arise from other (cf. MABhed 101.3ff.), his own presentation of the two truths and a
discussion regarding them. This is followed (cf. MABhed 122.7ff.) by his defense of
karmic causality within the Madhyamaka system which eschews the reality of all
things and his rejection of, primarily, the ālayavijñāna of the Vijñānavāda school, a
rejection that leads to the refutation of the possibility of the arising of the world from
truly existing vijñāna/citta and the rejection of other doctrines of the school. Only
after an excursion into an elucidation of nītārtha and neyārtha sūtras does Candra-
kīrti commence the refutation of arising from both self and other (MABhed 202.6ff.).
283 Candrakīrti is quoting from Buddhapalita's MMK commentary. BPed 10.18-19:
gzhan las kyang skye ba med de | ci'i phyir zhe na | thams cad las thams cad skye bar
thal bar 'gyur ba'i phyir ro. The statement is embedded in PP Tib: 'di la gzhan ni
dngos po rnams gzhan las kyang skye ba med pa ste | ci'i phyir zhe na | thams cad las
thams cad skye bar thal bar 'gyur ba'i phyir ro || (D: omits ||) zhes rnam par bshad pa
byed do || (D 50a5-6; P 60a5-6). Avalokitavrata identifies gzhan of 'di la gzhan ni as
Buddhapalita (D 102a1; P 119b7). PsP Tib reads: dngos po rnams gzhan las skye ba
med de thams cad las kyang thams cad skye bar 'gyur ba'i phyir ro || zhes rnam par
'chad do ||. sarvasambhavaprasaṁgāt is again translated merely as thams cad skye bar
'gyur ba'i phyir in PsP Tib when Buddhapālita’s consequence is repeated in Bhāvive-
ka's critique.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
143
Then, as regards this, because it is a statement of a conse-
quence,
,284 when the reversal (viparyaya) of the probandum (sā-
dhya) and the probans (sādhana) is made, contradiction [of the
consequence] with [your] original position (prākpakṣa) [becomes
evident, since the reversal states that] "Things arise from self,
from both [self and other] or without a cause (ahetutaḥ), because
a certain thing (kasyacit) arises from a certain thing (kutaścit).”
Otherwise 285 [that is, if the reversal is not accepted], since this
[probans] "because of the consequence that everything would
originate from everything" does not fall under²86 [either] proof
.286
284 PSP Tib translates prasangavākya as thal bar ʼgyur ba’i ngag, PP Tib attests glags
yod pa'i tshig. On Candrakīrti's replacement of sāvakāśa with prasañga, see n. 123.
In the present case too, I assume that sāvakāśavacana stood in PP Skt and that the
PsP translators, upon appropriating the criticism from PP Tib, replaced glags yod
pa'i tshig with thal bar 'gyur ba'i ngag in order to conform with Candrakīrti's pref-
erence for and thus use of prasanga in his reiteration of phrases in PP containing the
compound sāvakāśa.
L
285 De La Vallée Poussin (PSP₁ 37, n. 2) considers PSP Tib's gzhan du na yang to be
reflecting anyathāpi, but gzhan du na yang is also used elsewhere in the PsP to trans-
late anyathā. The PsP Tib translators have in the present case, however, adopted
gzhan du na yang from PP Tib (see the following notes).
66
286 PSP Tib: de la sgrub pa dang sun 'byin ba nyid med pa'i phyir for asya
sādhanadūṣanānantaḥpātitvāt. De La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 37, n. 3) reconstructs the
Skt for PSP Tib as atra sādhana-dūṣaṇatā-abhāvāt." I doubt that the PSP Tib
translators were confronted with such a reading in their Sanskrit manuscripts; it
seems more probable that PsP Tib reads as it does because the translators inserted the
(slightly modified) version of Bhāviveka's critique as found in PP Tib into their PSP
translation; PP Tib attests the phrase as de la sgrub pa dang sun dbyung ba nyid med
pa'i phyir (see also the following note). The fact that dūṣaṇāntaḥpātitvāc ca in
Candrakīrti's response is similarly translated as sun 'byin pa nyid kyang yin pa’i
phyir may only indicate that the translators preferred to employ a verb (yin) that
would better accord with the verb (med) of the PP Tib critique (note that at PSP₁
490.2 antaḥpātitvāt is translated more literally as nang du 'dus pa'i phyir). Whether
de La Vallée Poussin's reconstructed sādhanadūṣaṇatābhāvāt could represent the
original reading for PP Skt is difficult to know. PPT also attests de la sgrub pa dang
sun dbyung ba nyid med pa'i phyir throughout, but one must keep in mind that it was
translated by the same team of scholars that translated the PP; nevertheless, the
paraphrase in explanations such as mngon sum la sogs pa dang 'gal ba phyogs kyi
skyon rnams las 'ga' yang ma brjod pas de la gzhan sun dbyung ba nyid kyang med
pa yin pa'i phyir nyes pa yod do || (PPȚ D 103b3; P 111a7-8) leads one to wonder if
Candrakīrti's words might represent a paraphrase or interpretation of Bhāviveka's144
TRANSLATION
(sādhana) or refutation (dūṣaṇa), this [statement of Buddha-
pālita's would be] incoherent in meaning (asangatārtha).
287
original reason. *LŢ's author cites sādhanadūṣanānantaḥpātitvāt and explains it with
na sādhanam nāpi dūṣaṇam ity arthaḥ (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 123, 138 [fol. 2b1]).
Stcherbatsky (1927: 120 and n. 8) has not understood the compound and thus sug-
gests emending the text to "sādhana-dūṣaṇāntaḥ..., i.e., ity asya sādhanasya dūṣa-
ṇa..." in order to arrive at the meaning "because the argument contains its own des-
truction."
Bhāviveka exemplifies the incoherence he sees in Buddhapālita's argument with a
senseless verse (translated in Kajiyama 1963: 54; Ames 1993: 226). Avalokitavrata,
prior to citing the verse, explains the incoherence as arising from the dissonance
between the two parts of Buddhapālita's assertion: in stating the two parts of his con-
sequence, Buddhapālita ends up first asserting that arising does not exist, and then
that everything arises from everything: de ltar dngos po rnams gzhan las skye ba med
do zhes smras la de'i 'og tu thams cad las thams cad skye bar thal bar 'gyur ba’i
phyir ro zhes smras pas | de ltar gyur na rang gis sngar skye ba med par smras pa
dang de'i 'og tu thams cad las thams cad skye bar smras pa gnyis (P: nyid) don 'brel
pa med pa nyid yin pas rnam par bshad pa de ni mi rung ngo || (D 103b4-5; P 111a8-
111b2).
287 Candrakīrti is citing from Bhāviveka's PP, the translation of which reads: des na
de la glags yod pa'i tshig¹ yin pa'i phyir bsgrub par bya ba dang | sgrub pa² bzlog pa³
byas na dngos po rnams bdag gam gnyis sam³ rgyu med pa las skye bar 'gyur ba
dang | 'ga' zhig las 'ga' zhig skye bar 'gyur ba’i phyir phyogs snga ma dang 'gal bar
'gyur ro || gzhan du na yang thams cad las¹ thams cad skye bar thal bars 'gyur ba’i
phyir ro (P: ||) zhes bya ba' de la sgrub pa dang sun dbyung ba¹⁰0 nyid (D: gnyis) med
pa'i phyir | de ni don 'brel pa med pa yin te (D 50a6-7; P 60a6-60b1). ¹PsP Tib: thal
bar 'gyur ba'i ngag for glags yod pa'i tshig; ²PsP Tib: sgrub par byed pa for sgrub
pa; ³PSP Tib, PPT: par; ¹PPȚ: nas; 5PPT: gnyi ga 'am for gnyis sam; PsP Tib: gong;
7PPȚ P: omits thams cad las; ³PsP Tib omits thal bar; 'PsP Tib: de bas na for zhes
bya ba; ¹0PsP Tib: sun 'byin pa for sun dbyung ba. Translated in Kajiyama 1963: 53
and Ames 1993: 225f. The original position contradicted by the reversal is that things
do not arise, not the "theses” that result from the reversal, as Seyfort Ruegg's (2002:
72) translation misleadingly suggests. Seyfort Ruegg translates asangatārtha as "irre-
levant," but it does seem that Bhāviveka intends the meaning "incoherent,” since he
subsequently, stating that Buddhapalita's consequence is like it, cites a completely
incoherent verse (see PP D 50a7-50b1; P 60b1-2).
On the reversal of the prasanga, see Watanabe 2013 and n. 124. Avalokitavrata
describes the reversal of the sādhya, viz., “things do not arise from other, either”
(bsgrub par bya ba dngos po rnams gzhan las kyang skye ba med de zhes bya ba) as
resulting in "things arise from self, both, or without cause" (dngos po rnams bdag
gam gnyi ga 'am rgyu med pa las skye bar 'gyur ba dang), and the reversal of the
sādhana, viz., “there would be the consequence that everything would arise from
everything" as resulting in “a certain thing arises from a certain thing” (sgrub pa
thams cad las thams cad skye bar thal bar 'gyur ro (P: ||) zhes bya ba bzlog par byas145
[Reply:] This [critique, like your earlier one] too, is incoherent in
meaning,288 since it has already been explained [that reversal does not
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
na 'ga' zhig las 'ga' zhig skye bar 'gyur); cf. PPȚ D 103a1-2; P 120b1-2. He con-
siders the original position (phyogs snga ma; *prākpakṣa) that would be contradicted
through the reversal to be that asserted by Nāgārjuna in MMK I.1: 'di ltar slob dpon
gyis phyogs snga ma las | dngos po gang dag gang na yang || skyes pa nam yang yod
ma yin|zhes gsungs de dang 'gal bar 'gyur (PPT D 103a3-5; P 110b7-111a2; on
the misplaced text in P, see Ames 1993: 245, n. 119; correct his point of insertion for
P 121a from line 7 to line 4). “Otherwise" (gzhan tu na yang), that is, if Buddhapālita
refuses to reverse the sādhya and sādhana, leaving them to stand as stated, Avalo-
kitavrata continues, he can be faulted, because his [consequence's reason], namely,
that there would be the consequence that everything would arise from everything, is
not a property of the subject; the consequence is, on the one hand, not a proof of his
own position. And since his statement has not expressed any faults of the opponent's
proposition, i.e., contradiction with direct perception and so forth, it is not a refuta-
tion of the opponent's position: thams cad las thams cad skye bar smras pa de phyogs
kyi chos ma yin pa'i phyir | de la rang gi sgrub pa (P: ma?) nyid kyang med pa yin la |
gnas brtan buddhapālita'i rnam par bshad pa de mngon sum la sogs pa dang 'gal ba
phyogs kyi skyon rnams las 'ga' yang ma brjod pas de la gzhan sun dbyung ba nyid
kyang med pa yin pa’i phyir nyes pa yod do || (PPȚ D 103b2-3; P 111a6-8).
The two inferences set forth by Bhāviveka to prove non-arising from other have
already been cited by Candrakīrti and rejected as faulty because their reasons are not
accepted by both Bhāviveka and his opponent; see §51.
M
288 PSP Tib: 'di yang don 'brel pa med pa ma yin te. Stcherbatsky (1927: 121 and n. 1)
suggests emending the Sanskrit text so that it accords with PsP Tib (“... read asam-
gārtham nāsti." "It is not nonsense!"). De La Vallée Poussin notes Tib's reading and
the reading etadam apy asamgatārtha(m) of his three mss; he emends to etad apy
asamgatārtham, considering as support for his choice Candrakīrti’s response tad etad
ayuktam pūrvoditaparihārāt (PsPM §68; PsP₁ 39.4) to Bhāviveka's seyam vyākhyā na
yuktā prāguktadoṣāt (PsP §67 end; PsP₁ 39.2-3). Mss P and Q attest the correct
reading etad apy asangatārtham (D supports it with etad apy asamgatārtha). With
this statement, Candrakīrti intentionally parrots the final words of Bhāviveka’s cri-
tique (asangatārtham etad). PsP Tib’s interpretation is awkward inasmuch as api will
imply that Buddhapālita's first consequence has also been referred to as incoherent,
but there Bhāviveka did not declare that the argument was asangatārtha, rather that it
was ayukta. Cf. also PSPM §23 (PSP₁ 14.4), where Bhāviveka opens his criticism of
Buddhapālita's first consequence with the words tad ayuktam, and PsPM §24 (PSPL
15.3-4) where Candrakīrti, as here, rejects Bhāviveka's critique using his opponent's
own words (... tad ayuktam). The extra negation in PsP Tib may have been the result
of intentional change in one of the manuscripts relied on by the translators which had
been made by a previous scholar or student who understood etat to refer to
Buddhapalita's statement (as Bhāviveka intends his etat) and not, as Candrakīrti
intends it, to refer Bhāviveka's critique of Buddhapālita’s statement.146
apply to such consequences] and because [the consequence] falls
under refutation (dūṣaṇa) in that [it] refutes the matter proposed by
the opponent. Thus, there is nothing to this [criticism]; effort is
therefore not put forth again [to respond to your complaints].
TRANSLATION
§64. Nor do things arise from both [self and other], because the faults
stated for both positions (ubhayapakṣa) would entail,2⁹0 and because
28⁹ PSP Tib, which may be corrupt, appears to understand three reasons: gong kho nar
bstan zin pa'i phyir dang | gzhan gyis dam bcas pa'i don sun 'byin par byed pa yin pa
dang | sun 'byin pa nyid kyang yin pa'i phyir. The Sanskrit expects yin pas instead of
yin pa dang.
290 Buddhapālita states only this single consequence for the position of arising from
both self and other. BPed 10.19-21: bdag dang gzhan gnyis las kyang skye ba med de |
gnyi ga’i skyon du thal bar 'gyur ba’i phyir ro ||. Bhāviveka does not criticize this
prasanga statement of Buddhapālita’s, presumably because the consequence only
refers back to the faults already adduced for arising from self and arising from other.
Bhāviveka declares that Nāgārjuna was inspired to include and reject the position of
arising from both self and other on account of 1) the Sānkhya claim that an effect
arises from causes both distinct and not distinct from it, such as, respectively, earth,
etc., and a seed: grangs can dag ni byed rgyu rnam par phye ba dang | rnam par ma
phye ba (D: bas) sa la sogs pa dang sa bon gyi mtshan nyid dag las 'bras bu myu gu
zhes bya ba skye'o zhes smra (PP D 50b 1-2; P 60b2-3) and 2) the Jaina claim that
things arise from self and other, for instance, that a gold ring arises from both gold
and fire, etc.: gcer bur rgyu ba pa'i phyogs dgag phyir yang ... 'di ltar de dag ni gser
gyi sor gdub ni gser dang | me la sogs pa las bdag dang gzhan las skye bar smra ba’i
phyir ro || (D 50b3-4; P 60b6-7; Ames proposes nirgranthacārin as the possible
Sanskrit for gcer bur rgyu ba pa [1993: 246, n. 142]). Bhāviveka argues that the
proof for non-arising from both is included in the proofs for non-arising from self
and for non-arising from other, and that there does not exist an inference showing
that things arise from both self and other; see PP D 50b3; P 60b5-6; Kajiyama 1963:
54; Ames 1993: 226. See also MHK III.192.
Reasons disproving arising from both self and other are set forth by Candrakīrti in
MA VI.98: gnyis las skye ba 'ang rigs pa’i ngo bo ma yin gang gi phyir || bshad zin
nyes pa de dag thog tu 'bab pa yin phyir ro || 'di ni 'jig rten las min de nyid du yang
'dod min te || gang phyir re re las ni skye ba 'grub (MABhed grub) pa yod ma yin ||
(MABhed 202.8-9; correct the verse number at MABh 1911: 256 and 258 from 95 to
98). Candrakīrti also attributes the position of arising from both self and other to the
Jainas, who claim that a pot, for example, in that the pot and the lump of clay from
which it is made are not other, arises from self; yet since the activity of the potter,
etc., that produce it are different from the pot, it also arises from other (see MABhed
202.10-18; MABh 1911: 256. The Jainas are referred to by Candrakīrti as tshig gal
gnyis su smra ba rnams; along with de La Vallée Poussin, I do not understand thePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
291
there is no capacity for production by either one on its own.
(= Nāgārjuna) will state [further on in the Madhyamakaśāstra],
147
For he
There might be suffering (duḥkha) created by both [self and
other] if [suffering] could be created by each one singly (ekaika-
kṛta).2⁹
292
meaning of tshig gal here). Similarly, Candrakīrti states, they argue that since Maitra
is born in the present life with the same soul (jīva) as in the previous, he arises from
self; but since his birth is determined by his mother, father, merit, demerit and
influxes, he arises from other. Thus, assert the Jainas, because they neither claim
arising exclusively from self nor arising exclusively from other, they are unaffected
by the earlier criticism with respect to arising from self or arising from other (see
MABhed 203.2-12; MABh 1911: 256f.).
291 PSP Tib translates the second reason given by Candrakīrti with skyed par byed pa'i
nus pa med pa'i phyir; I too understand utpāda in a causal sense here, i.e., in the
sense of production as opposed to its more usual meaning of arising. Cf. MA VI.98d:
gang phyir re re las ni skye ba (intransitive) 'grub (MABhed grub) pa yod ma yin
(MABhed 205.2) and MABhed to 6.98d: dper na til gcig gis 'bru mar 'byin nus pas ||
mang po rnams kyis kyang 'gyur la || nus pa ma mthong ba’i bye ma rnams kyis ni ma
yin pa ltar re res bskyed par 'gyur na ni || de lta bu’i rang bzhin can mang po rnams
kyis kyang 'gyur ba zhig go|| (MABhed 205.3-6).
292 Candrakīrti is citing MMK XII.9ab: syād ubhābhyām kṛtam duḥkham syād
ekaikakṛtam yadi (Ye 2011a follows the ABh, BP, PP tradition which does not
include MMK XII.6 [see Ye 2007b: 166] and thus numbers the verse as XII.8).
Suffering, the topic of the twelfth chapter and as made clear by Nāgārjuna in MMK
XII.2, refers to the five skandhas. In kārikās XII.2-6 the skandhas and the pudgala
are individually considered and rejected, each from the point of view of "self" and
"other," as that by which suffering, i.e., the skandhas, is created. The alternatives of
suffering being created by self, by other, by both and without a cause are presented
and addressed already in the Canon (suffering in the Canonical contexts refers to "the
mass of suffering"); see, e.g. SN II.19.27-20.16: Kim nu kho bho Gotama sayam-
katam dukkhanti || Mā hevam Kassapāti Bhagavā avoca || Kim pana bho Gotama
paramkatam dukkhanti || Mā hevam Kassapāti Bhagavā avoca || Kim nu kho bho
Gotama sayamkatañ ca paramkatañ ca dukkhanti || Mā hevam Kassapāti Bhagavā
avoca || Kim pana bho Gotama asayam-kāram aparam-kāram adhicca samuppannam
dukkhanti. Mā hevam Kassapāti Bhagavā avoca || ... so karoti so pațisamvediyatīti kho
Kassapa ādito sato sayamkatam dukkhanti iti vadam sassatam etam pareti || Añño
karoti añño paṭisamvediyatīti kho Kassapa vedanābhitunnassa sato paramkatam
dukkhanti iti vadam ucchedam etam pareti || Ete te Kassapa ubho ante anupagamma
majjhena Tathāgato dhammam deseti || avijjāpaccayā sankhārā || sankhārapaccayā
viññāṇam || pe || Evam etassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti || (cf. SN₁
545-547). Note that the fourth alternative is presented as adhicca samuppannam, thus
fortuitous arising. See DN I.28-29, where the Buddha explains that one group of148
§65. Nor do [things] arise without a cause (ahetutaḥ), because the
faults that will be stated by way of [other assertions on the part of
Nagarjuna] would be entailed, such as,
TRANSLATION
When the cause (hetu) does not exist, neither the effect (kārya)
nor the [co-operative] cause (kāraṇa) exists,293
and because of the entailment of faults such as [the following from
the Madhyamakāvatāra]:
holders of the view of fortuitous arising consists of persons who were previously
gods in a realm without consciousness and are thus unable to remember more than
the (re-)arising of consciousness. That is, through meditative concentration (samādhi)
in the present life, these persons, previously asaññadevas, gain memory of the past,
but only to the point of the re-arising of consciousness after the asañña existence,
and they thus think that they came into existence only then and did not exist
previously. Such a person thus thinks: “Adhicca-samuppanno attā ca loko ca. Tam
kissa hetu? Aham hi pubbe nāhosim, so'mhi etarahi ahutvā sattattāya pariṇato ti”
(DN I.29.1-3). The other group, the Buddha states, has come to the view of fortuitous
arising through reasoning. Cf. also SN II.22-23, 33-35, 38-39, 41-42, 112-114 for the
rejection of suffering, pleasure and pain, and the links of dependent-arising created
by self, other, both or fortuitously.
The pudgala spoken of by Nāgārjuna appears to be the controversial “person” main-
tained by the Vātsīputrīyas and Sāmmitīyas (see, e.g., Bareau 1955: 115f., 123;
AKBh IX; Schayer 1931: 16, n. 13). Vetter (1992: 496), who assumes that Nāgārjuna
spent his early years in a "pudgalavāda milieu," writes, "Accepting a person on a
preliminary level of truth as having the same reality as the constituents (skandha) of
a person seems to be the most individual characteristic we know of Nāgārjuna.” In
certain other chapters of the MMK, it can been seen that Nāgārjuna accepts the
reality of the subject or agent on the surface level.
293 Candrakīrti cites MMK VIII.4ab: hetāv asati kāryam ca kāraṇam ca na vidyate |.
MMK VIII.3: karoti yady asadbhūto sadbhūtam karma kārakaḥ | ahetukam bhavet
karma kartā cāhetuko bhavet ||. I have translated the half-verse following Candra-
kīrti's interpretation of it; it is questionable whether his interpretation of kāraṇa as
co-operative cause, which appears to rely on Buddhapālita's interpretation of kāraṇa
as *pratyaya, reflects Nāgārjuna's intent. Cf. May 1959: 146, n. 422 for comments on
the half-verse. Garfield (1995: 179) translates kāraṇa as “cause," but his comments
on VIII.4 betray a lack of understanding of VIII.4ab and the verse as a whole. See
Bhattacharya 1981 for comments on Candrakīrti's interpretation of the chapter.
In his introduction to VIII.4ab, Candrakīrti makes it known that he considers the
proposition of an unreal agent and object, which entails the lack of a cause for both
the agent and the object, to be equivalent to asserting a position propounding no
cause: sati ca ahetukavādābhyupagame kāryam ca kāraṇam ca sarvam apoditam syāt.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
149
And the world would certainly not be perceived if it were devoid
of a cause, just like the colour and scent of a sky-lotus [is not
294
perceived].²
294 Candrakīrti cites MA VI.100ab: grhyeta naiva ca jagad yadi hetuśūnyam syād
yadvad eva gaganotpalavarṇagandhau |. MABhed 207.7-8: gal te 'gro ba rgyu yis
stong par 'gyur na nam mkha' yi || ut pa la yi dri mdog ji bzhin bzung du med nyid
na ||. Cf. MABh 1911: 260. PsP Tib: gal te rgyu yis stong na ʼgro ba 'di dag gzung
bya min || ji ltar nam mkha’i utpala yi dri dang kha dog bzhin ||.
tr
Candrakīrti argues in the MA and MABh from kārikā 99 to kārikā 103 with the
proponent of intrinsic nature (*svabhāvavādin; ngo ba nyid smra pa), first against the
arising of the things of the world without any causes, then against the denial of the
retribution of acts as regards the paraloka (see MABhed 205.8-212.14; MABhr 1911:
259-266). The svabhāvavādin opens the debate by declaring: gal te skye ba rgyu las
yin na ni de 'bras bu'i bdag tu gyur pa dang | gzhan du gyur pa dang | gnyi gar gyur
pa zhig tu 'gyur bas nyes pa de dag tu 'gyur ba zhig na | bdag gis ni rgyu khas ma
blangs pas bshad zin pa’i nyes pa'i go skabs med do || de'i phyir dngos po rnams kyi
skye ba ni ngo ba nyid las 'byung ba kho na yin te | (MABhed 205.8-13). The doctrine
of intrinsic nature appears to have been common to the Materialists and the Ājīvikas.
Silburn (1989: 133) writes, “C'est du jeu de niyati, svabhāva et des circonstances
environnantes que dépend la diversité des êtres et leurs conditions heureuses et
malheureuses. Autrement dit, le sort de chacun n'est nullement déterminé par ses
actes vertueux et coupables et la transmigration n'obéit en aucune manière aux lois
du karman. C'est pour cette raison que les Bouddhistes désignent les doctrines de la
nature propre (svabhāva) par les termes de ahetuvāda, 'production sans cause' ou
adhiccasamuppāda ‘apparition accidentelle.' Pour les Svabhāvavādin les choses sur-
gissent à l'existence sans qu'intervienne une cause finale interne ou externe tels les
actes antérieurement accomplis de chacun ou la volonté divin. Les choses évoluent
de façon méchanique, de par leur nature propre: si les épines auxquelles je me suis
heurté sont ainsi acérées et si elles se trouvent sur mon passage c'est que leur nature
est de piquer; ce n'est nullement par décret divin, ni en raison de fautes que j'aurais
pu commettre." Regarding svabhāvavāda, see Silburn 1989: 133-135; MABhr 1911:
258, n. 1; May 1959: 122, n. 320; Bhattacharya 2012.
Bhāviveka rejects arising without a cause by arguing that there is no inference
demonstrating uncaused arising, and that such a thesis would be in conflict with both
inference and what is generally accepted (see PP D 50b5-6; P 61a1-2; Kajiyama
1963: 54f.; Ames 1993: 227; see also MHK III.194-195). Bhāviveka then, moving on
to interpret no cause (*ahetu) as bad cause (*kuhetu; see n. 298), presents arguments
from the side of the svabhāvavādin; Avalokitavrata identifies the proponents of the
doctrine of svabhāva as Lokāyatas, the followers of Maharși 'Jig rten mig (see Ames
1993: 247, n. 147). Avalokitavrata further identifies the proponent of no cause called
'Jug stobs can by Bhāviveka as also a disciple of Maharṣi 'Jig rten mig (ibid., 1993:
247, n. 156).150
§66. The Master Buddhapalita, for his part, says,
Things do not arise without a cause, because of the consequence
that everything would originate from everything, all the time."
TRANSLATION
§67. The Master Bhāviveka criticizes in regard to this too:
Also with respect to this [argument], on account of [its] being the
statement of a consequence, if the expression of the reversed
probandum and probans is accepted as the meaning of the
295 Candrakīrti cites here Buddhapalita's consequence for the position of arising
without a cause, quoting only the first of its two reasons. BPed 10.21-23: rgyu med pa
las kyang skye ba med de | rtag tu thams cad las thams cad skye bar thal bar 'gyur
ba'i phyir dang | rtsom pa thams cad don med pa nyid kyi skyon du 'gyur ba'i phyir
ro. Buddhapālita repeats the reasons (rtag tu ...) in his commentary on MMK IV.2
(BP ed 60.10-12). His consequence with the first reason is cited in PP just before
Bhāviveka's critique of it (D 53a5; P 64a5): 'di la gzhan ni dngos po rnams rgyu med
pa las kyang skye ba med de | rtag tu thams cad las thams cad skye bar thal ba la sogs
par 'gyur ba'i phyir; Avalokitavrata identifies the author of the statement as
Buddhapalita (D 153b1; P 176b7). As noted by Ames (1993: 250, n. 197), even
though Bhāviveka indicates the second reason only with la sogs pa, he does refer to it
specifically in his critique, albeit in its reversed form. The translators of PsP Tib have
relied on BP Tib or PP Tib for the citation (PsP Tib attests the kyang not found in
Skt). Cp. MA VI.99ab: gal te rgyu med kho nar skye bar lta zhig 'gyur na ni de tshe
mtha' dag rtag tu thams cad las kyang skye 'byung (MABhun: 'gyur) zhing | (MABhed
206.3-4; MABh 1911: 259). According to Candrakīrti's commentary on MA
VI.99ab, which constitutes his initial response to the svabhāvavādin, things such as
the fruits of mango trees and breadfruit trees (Tib: la ku rtsva [MABhun: tsa]; Skt:
*lakuca, *lakaca; Artocarpus lacucha) would always (*sadā) be produced because
they would no longer be dependent on a ripening process determinative of their
appearance at a specific time. The eyes of the peacock's tail-feathers would appear
on a crow, and a peacock would have parrot feathers all the time, even while still in
the womb, i.e., in its egg (mngal gyi gnas) (MABh 206.12-19; Huntington's [1989:
250, n. 125] translation of the section has some problems). Buddhapālita's second
reason, which is not cited here in the PSP but referred to via Bhāviveka's cited cri-
tique, is exemplified in MA VI.99cd: "And this world would not gather seeds and
such by the hundreds with a view to the coming forth of a result" ('bras 'byung ched
du 'jig rten 'di yis sa bon la sogs ni| brgya phrag dag gi sgo nas sdud par byed par
yang mi 'gyur). Huntington (1989: 169) mistranslates the half-verse: "and hundreds
of thousands of seeds sown by common people for the purpose of raising crops
would result in no harvest whatsoever.” Cp. also Padmakara 2002: 82, where brgya
phrag dag gi sgo nas is related to worldly people's act of gathering of seeds and
translated "in all their myriad ways."PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
151
statement (vākyārtha), then this ends up being asserted: “Things
arise from a cause (hetutaḥ), 1) because a certain thing (kasyacit)
arises from a certain thing (kutaścit) at a certain time (kadācit),
and 2) because of the usefulness of undertakings (ārambha-
sāphalya)." Therefore, that explanation [of Buddhapālita's] is not
appropriate because of the fault stated earlier.296
§68. Thus others [= Candrakīrti and his party consider] this [criticism
of Bhāviveka's] to be inappropriate because [its] refutation was stated
previously.²
297
§69. And what has also been asserted [by Bhāviveka, namely, that
ahetutaḥ can additionally be understood in the meaning of "bad
cause"] for the sake of taking into account [opponents' positions
which assume the cause of things to be] the Lord (īśvara), etc., is also
296 Candrakīrti is citing from Bhāviveka's PP: de la yang glags yod pa'i tshig¹ yin
pa'i phyir gal te | bsgrub par bya ba dang | sgrub pa² bzlog (P: zlog) pa’i tshig gi don³
mngon par 'dod na desª 'di skad bstan par 'gyur te | dngos po rnams rgyu las skye bar
'gyur ba dang | lan 'ga' kha cig las kha cig skye bar 'gyur ba dang | rtsom pa 'bras bu
dang bcas pa nyid du 'gyur ba’i phyir³ deº ni mi rigs te | sngar smras pa’i skyon du
'gyur ba'i phyir ro || (D 53a5-7; P 64a5-7).
¹PsP Tib: thal bar 'gyur ba’i ngag for glags yod pa’i tshig; ²sgrub par byed pa for
grub pa; ³bzlog pa gsal ba ngag gi don du (following PsP Skt) for bzlog pa’i tshig gi
don; de'i tshe; 5phyir ro || zhes bstan par 'gyur na (PP Tib places bstan par 'gyur te
before the reversed probandum and probans); "bshad pa de.
Bhāviveka concludes the critique as he did his critique against Buddhapālita's
consequence for arising from other, i.e., by referring back to his earlier criticism: ji
ste gzhan du na yang don 'brel pa med pa yin te | snga ma bzhin no. Translated in
Kajiyama 1963: 62 and Ames 1993: 234. The translators of PSP Tib, citing from PP
Tib, as usual, replace glags yod pa’i tshig with thal bar 'gyur ba’i ngag and sgrub pa
with sgrub par byed pa and make other minor adjustments. They adhere to PP Tib’s
format in listing the reversed sādhya and sādhana and connecting them with dangs.
PPT Tib also follows the PP Tib format.
Bhāviveka refers to the fault he explained in regard to Buddhapālita's consequence
refuting arising from other, namely, that the reversal of the sādhya and sādhana
contradicts the earlier position that things do not arise; if the reversal is not accepted,
the statement does not fall under either proof or refutation. See PPȚ D 154b7-155a7;
P 178b1-179a2.
2⁹7 Candrakīrti refers again to his refutation of Bhāviveka's critique of Buddha-
palita's consequence for arising from self.152
not reasonable, because the Lord and so forth-depending on [the
specific cause] maintained are included in the positions of self,
other, and both [self and other].25
298
TRANSLATION
§70. Therefore, this has been proven, [namely,] that there is no
arising. And since arising is impossible, dependent-arising qualified
by non-arising, etc., is established.
§71. In regard to this, [the Conservative Buddhist] states: If you
determine that dependent-arising is in this way qualified by non-
arising, etc., [i.e., in the sense that nothing arises,] then [as regards]
that which has been stated by the Exalted One, [to wit,] -
With ignorance as condition (avidyāpratyaya), the impulses
(samskāra)2⁹9 [come to be]; from the cessation (nirodha) of
ignorance, the impulses cease;³
300
298 Bhāviveka considers ahetu to have the alternative meaning of "bad cause"
(*kuhetu). In support of ahetu interpreted as kuhetu, he cites the example abhāryā,
which, he states, besides meaning “not a wife,” can also mean “bad wife”: yang na
rgyu med ces (P: omits ces) bya ba ni rgyu ngan pa ste chung ma med pa zhes bya ba
la sogs pa bzhin no || (PP D 50b7; P 61a4); cf. AKBh ad AK III.29ab: yathā tarhi
kubhāryā abhāryety ucyate kuputraś cāputraḥ (AKBhed 141.8-9). Bhāviveka includes
under “bad cause” intrinsic nature (*svabhāva; ngo bo nyid), the Lord (*īśvara;
dbang phyug), spirit / Cosmic Man (*puruṣa; skyes bu), primordial matter (*pradhā-
na; gtso bo), time (*kāla; dus), Nārāyaṇa, and so forth (ādi); see Ames 1993: 247, n.
146 for Avalokitavrata's identification of the members alluded to with "and so
forth." Bhāviveka refutes these “bad causes” individually and at length; see PP D
51a1-52b6; P 61a6-63b5; Kajiyama 1963: 55-60; Ames 1993: 227-233; for his
refutation of īśvara, see PP D 51a7-52b5; P61b7-62a7; MHK III.215-223. *LT:
ahetor īśvarādeḥ (Yonezawa 2004: 123, 139 [fol. 2b1]).
Candrakīrti has asserted in his MABh that since those holding the positions of arising
from / caused by īśvara, etc., would consider īśvara to be the same as, other than, or
both the same as and other than the things that arise, they do not escape the faults
associated with arising from self, other or both, and therefore there can be no fifth
alternative for / conception of a productive cause: gang dag dbang phyug la sogs pa
dag las dngos po rnams skye bar mngon par 'dod pa de dag gi ltar na yang dbang
phyug la sogs pa de dag bdag tu gyur pa'am | gzhan du gyur pa'am | gnyi gar gyur pa
zhig tu 'gyur bas dbang phyug la sogs pa rgyur smra ba dag kyang bshad zin pa’i
skyon las mi 'da' ste | de’i phyir skyed par byed pa’i rgyu’i rnam par rtog pa gzhan
Inga pa yod pa ma yin no || (MABhed 214.20-215.5).similarly,
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
299
153
As Schmithausen (2000d: 65-66) has observed, samskāra appears to have
originally been closely connected in meaning with the wish and wishful imagining,
and with the desire, indeed the firm resolve, for a specific sort of rebirth, and in this
latter sense was seen to serve as the preliminary or preparatory act for the securing of
consciousness (vijñāna) in the womb of one's future mother (see also Vetter 2000:
45f.). Certain descriptions of chains of dependent-arising in the Canon that were not
expanded to include all 12 members reveal that the link samskāra in such chains had
a meaning quite close to thirst (tṛṣṇā, tanha); thus as a functionally equivalent term,
samskāra was used in place of tṛṣṇā as the second member of the twelve-linked chain
of dependent arising (see Vetter 2000: 66; also Vetter 1988: 51). cetanā, intent (more
appropriately translated, according to Vetter [2000: 30], as "decision") was on
occasion used as a definition for samskāra; samskāra understood as intention brought
the concept into the domain of karma, with the result that karma in fact became the
general later interpretation of samskāra of the 12 links; see, e.g., AK III.21b: samskā-
rāḥ pūrvakarmaṇaḥ and its commentary: pūrvajanmany eva yā puṇyādikarmāvasthā
seva (read saiva) samskārā[ḥ]. Candrakīrti, following this interpretation as set forth
by Nāgārjuna in MMK XXVI.1 (punarbhavāya samskārān avidyānivṛtas tridhā |
abhisamskurute yāms tair gatim gacchati karmabhiḥ), comments: avidyayā nivṛtaḥ
chaditaḥ pudgalaḥ punarbhavāya punarbhavārtham punarbhavotpattyartham abhi-
samskaroti utpadayati [yān] kuśalādicetanāviseṣāms te [punarbhavābhisamskārāt]
samskārāḥ | te ca trividhāḥ kuśalā akuśalā ānejyāś ca | yadi vā kāyikā vācikā mānasāś
ceti (PSP₁ 542.12-543.2). Cf. also YȘV 204, n. 347. I follow Vetter in translating
samskārāḥ as “impulses"; see his enlightening discussion on samskāra and on abhi-
sam(s)√kṛ and its derivatives in Vetter 2000: 27-63. On abhisam(s)√kṛ and its
derivatives see also the important comments in Schmithausen 1987b: 156.
tr
300 The citation presented is the first of five agama citations considered by the Con-
servative Buddhist to refute specific characterizations of dependent-arising as set
forth in the MMK mangala ślokas. This first citation is intended as authoritative evi-
dence against the characterization of dependent-arising as “without cessation” (ani-
rodha). Only the first two links of 12-membered dependent-arising as they respect-
ively appear in presentations of the formula describing coming into being (samu-
daya) and cessation (nirodha) are mentioned in the citation, the focus being on the
fact that the Buddha stated that ignorance ceases. Cf. SN II.1.10-11: Avijjāpaccayā
bhikkhave sankhārā || sankārapaccayā viññānam passim; SN II.9.5-6: avijjāni-
rodhā sankāranirodho passim. Bodhi (2000: 725, n. 1) notes that the SN-attha
explains that avijjapaccayā saṁkhārā should be understood in the meaning tasmā avi-
jjāpaccayā sankhārā sambhavanti.
See also SSVed 245.1-8 (ŚSVÅ 83, and n. 825) where the Mādhyamika is accused of
distorting the original teaching of pratītyasamutpāda.154
TRANSLATION
Impermanent, alas, are the constituent elements (samskāra)³01
which are subject to arising (utpāda) and perishing (vyaya),
For having arisen, they cease; their calming is happiness
(sukha);30
.302
303
likewise, 30
301 On the word sankhārā used to indicate external objects, see Vetter 2000: 53-63.
For instances in addition to the verse cited above where sankhārā appears to refer to
the five skandhas, see ibid., 61f. As the context from which Candrakīrti has taken the
verse is unknown, I have translated samskārāḥ here as referring to the five skandhas
(see Vetter 2000: 62).
302 Udānavarga I.3: anityā bata samskārā utpādavyayadharmiṇaḥ | utpadya hi
nirudhyante teṣām vyupaśamaḥ sukham ||; see Bernhard 1965: 96. Candrakīrti places
this Canonical citation in the mouth of the opponent representing the Buddhists of the
Conservative schools primarily because it affirms arising (utpāda) and thus
contradicts and sublates the MMK mangala ślokas' declaration that dependent-
arising is "without arising" (anutpāda). The previous Canonical statement was cited
for the sake of contradicting anirodha of the mangala ślokas, and the present state-
ment secondarily addresses cessation with the words vyaya and the verb nirudhyante.
Cp. DN II.157.8-9: aniccā vata samkhārā uppādavayadhammino, uppajjitvā niru-
jjhanti, tesam vūpasamo sukho' ti; DN II.199.6-7; SN I.158; SN 1.200 attests the
variant reading aniccā sabbe sankhārā; AKBhed 80.15; other parallels in Bernhard
1965: 96; Pāsādika 1989: 40; Vetter 2000: 61, n. 127; see also Bodhi 2000: 348, n. 20
and Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 77, n. 107. The same verse is cited by Candrakīrti in the
YSV (once only the first quarter, later the entire verse); see YȘVed 27 and 60,
references at YSV 123, n. 66.
tr
303
PSP₁ presents after the previous anityā bata statement (intended by the Conserva-
tive Buddhist as evidence contradicting the MMK mangala ślokas characterization
of dependent-arising as “without arising” [anutpāda]) and before the following eko
dharmaḥ citation (intended as evidence contradicting the MMK mangala śloka’s
characterization of dependent-arising as "without one thing” [anekārtha]) a further
citation from āgama. This citation in PsP₁ reads: utpādād vā tathāgatānām anutpā-
dād vā tathāgatānām sthitaivaiṣā dharmāṇām dharmatā; it can be translated
"[Regardless of] whether the Tathāgatas arise or the Tathāgatas do not arise, this
[real] nature (dharmatā) of things (dharma) definitely abides (sthita)." It was in-
cluded in PSP₁ because all three of the manuscripts used by de La Vallée Poussin (my
L, M and N) attest the citation. The other paper manuscripts used for the present
study as well as ms Q also attest the citation (ms Q's citation has sthitiraiṣā for sthi-
taivaiṣā and an additional dharmmadhātus as its last word), and PsP Tib presents the
translation de bzhin gshegs pa rnams byung yang rung | de bzhin gshegs pa rnams ma
byung yang rung | chos rnams kyi chos nyid 'di ni gnas pa kho na ste. The well-
known citation was assumed by previous scholars to have been included by
Candrakīrti for the sake of providing representative āgama evidence from the Con-
LPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
155
servative Buddhist side that contradicts the MMK mangala ślokas' assertion that
dependent-arising is not eternal (aśāśvata). I do not include the citation in my edition
because I am convinced that it is an accretion. Both manuscript and contextual evi-
dence speak against its being intrinsic to the work. On the side of the manuscript
evidence, ms P does not appear to have attested the citation. There is damage in P
that starts with the final m of sukham of the anityā bata citation (the diplomatic
reading for P is (sukh)ạ+) and continues on, such that P lacks approximately the next
10-11 akṣaras. When the text becomes readable again, the words yaduta catvāra
("namely, the four”) appear (only the ā of āhārāḥ is visible); these are the final three
words of the citation that is cited for the sake of contradicting dependent-arising
characterized as "without one thing." There is thus only enough space in the dam-
aged area for the words tathā eko dharmaḥ sattvasthitaye, i.e., for the introductory
tathā and the words which precede yaduta catvāra āhārāḥ. Ms Q, as stated, does
attest the citation, but it does not occur in Q's main text: the entire citation has
instead been written in Q's lower margin. This citation in Q is followed (also in the
lower margin) by a second citation, which appears to read kāmābhāvaḥ param
sukham ("The non-existence / absence of desire is the highest happiness"). This latter
citation is surely intended as authoritative proof from the Conservative side against
the MMK mangala ślokas' assertion that dependent-arising is without annihilation
(anuccheda). The appearance of the two citations in Q's margin caused me to wonder
if perhaps mss P's and Q's exemplars had attested the two citations and both P's and
Q's scribes had by chance committed exactly the same eyeskip, i.e., both had jumped
from the final sukham of the anityā bata citation to the final sukham of the
kāmābhāvaḥ citation—a rather unlikely scenario but certainly not impossible. If this
had happened, Q’s marginal material would indicate that Q's scribe (or his proof-
reader) noticed the mistake and added the two missing citations in the margin. The
paper manuscripts, on the other hand, contain the dharmatā citation within their main
text but lack the kāmābhāvaḥ citation, and it seems unusual that they too would have
dropped an entire citation at this point; even an eyeskip from the tathā introducing
the kāmābhāvaḥ citation to tathā introducing the eko dharmaḥ citation has to be ex-
cluded because the paper manuscripts all lack the expected tathā before the eko
dharmaḥ citation. The fact that a postulation of three independent eyeskips, each of
entire citations, seemed suspicious suggested that other avenues needed to be
explored. There are of course a number of possible alternatives for transmission of
text from ms ß to mss & and and on to P, Q, and ms ɩ (and possibilities for its omis-
sion), but I will not detail them here because none are convincing and because they
all pale in the light of further evidence and analysis. From the point of view of
context, a main point to be noted is that even though Candrakīrti has the Conserva-
tive Buddhist present scriptural passages that refute the individual qualifiers of
dependent-arising in the mangala śloka, the primary goal of the opponent is to
establish that individual things exist, and that they come into and pass out of being;
his aim is definitely not to convince the Mādhyamikas that anything exists eternally
or that the annihilation of things is to be accepted. The Conservative Buddhists would
in fact heartily agree that dependent-arising is non-eternal (aśāśvata) and without156
TRANSLATION
annihilation (anuccheda). Attention can be drawn to Bhāviveka's presentation in his
PP of a group of Conservative Buddhists who argue that they accept all eight nega-
tions stated in the MMK's mangala śloka (of course according to their own
interpretation of the negations) and who expressly state that they accept that depend-
ent-arising is without annihilation and permanence because the result arises in de-
pendence on a cause and because when the result arises, the cause ceases (cf. PP D
48a5-6; P 75a6-7; Ames 1993: 220). It is highly improbable that Candrakīrti had the
intention, especially in the present context, to introduce as his interlocutor a group of
Conservative Buddhists who would be so bold as to argue that dependent-arising,
i.e., dependently arisen things, are characterized by eternality and annihilation. While
it is certainly true that the dharmatā citation was employed in Canonical and Conser-
vative circles, its point, when used in regard to dependent-arising by members of
these circles, was that things arise in dependence on conditions; it is only the fact that
they arise in this way―i.e., that it is their real nature (dharmatā) to arise in depend-
ence on conditions whether or not a Buddha turns up to realize and then teach this
truth—that endures. (For the Conservative schools that considered dependent-arising
to be asamskṛta; see Bareau 1955: 285).
Finally, were the two citations in question to have been original, one expects that
Candrakīrti would have arranged them so that they too would follow the order of the
related words in the first mangala śloka: unlike all of the other manuscripts'
Canonical statements for the present passage, Q's pair addressing aśāśvata and
anuccheda are in the wrong order (the first mangala śloka reads anirodham anutpā-
dam anucchedam aśāśvatam).
We have little choice but to conclude that Ms Q's, the paper manuscripts' and PsP
Tib's citation is an accretion. It is easy to imagine that later scribes or readers of the
PSP might have been puzzled by the fact that the content of the scriptural statements
of the present PsP passage lines up with only six, and not all eight, of the famous
negations in the first mangala śloka. At some point, one or more individuals must
have decided to "repair" the text by introducing citations that would address aśāśvata
and anuccheda. The addition of the first and second citations probably occurred at
two separate times since the second citation was obviously not in the manuscript re-
lied upon the copyist of ms ɩ (the closest common ancestor of the paper manuscripts)
or in the manuscripts relied upon by the translators of PsP Tib. The paper manu-
scripts' and PsP Tib's lack of an introductory tathā before the eko dharmaḥ citation
is also explained by the interpolation: the tathā before the dharmatā citation origin-
ally introduced the eko dharmaḥ citation, but when the dharmatā citation was in-
serted after this tathā, a following tathā was not, and this left the dharmatā citation
and the two following citations (which can be seen as a pair) to be introduced by a
single tathā.
The main text of ms Q, which does not attest either of the two citations, has to be
accepted as correct, and its two marginal citations have to be seen as later extraneous
additions. Ms P's text strongly supports this conclusion; the fact that it is missing 10-
11 akṣaras at the critical point is hardly a hindrance, since the lack of (required)
space speaks for itself. I hypothesize that Q received both of the citations from ms 0,PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
There is one factor (eko dharmaḥ) for the support of beings,
namely, the four nutriments (āhāra);304
157
Two dharmas (dve dharmau) protect the world: shame (hrī) and
embarrassment (apatrāpya);³
.305
since they would have been in its main text had they been received from ms 8 over
ms n. The occurrence in the paper manuscripts of the first citation is due to ms u
having also received it from ms 8 (see infra Manuscript Relationships, where I
explain that ms ɩ has also received readings from ms 8, though far fewer than ms Q).
PSP Tib's translation of the citation is explained by the fact that one of the manu-
scripts relied on by the PsP Tib translators carried the readings of a manuscript re-
lated to ms 8. The translators must have concluded, as they did in a number of other
cases when they encountered one of ms 8's interpolated readings, that the citation
was inherent to Candrakīrti's text and thus deserved to be included in their trans-
lation.
For textual references for the utpādād vā tathāgatānām anutpādād vā tathāgatānām
sthitaivaisā dharmāṇām dharmatā citation, see Appendix X.
304 The citation as presented by Candrakīrti reads: eko dharmaḥ sattvasthitaye yaduta
catvāra āhārāḥ. It is considered by the opponent to be Canonical evidence contra-
dicting the MMK mangala ślokas' assertion that dependent-arising is “without one
thing” (anekārtham). Cp. MN I.261.5-12: Cattāro me bhikkhave āhārā bhūtānam vā
sattānam ṭhitiyā sambhavesīnam vā anuggahāya, katame cattāro: kabaļimkāro āhāro
olāriko vā sukhumo vā, phasso dutiyo, manosañcetanā tatiyā, viññāṇam catuttham.
Ime ca bhikkhave cattāro āhārā kimnidānā kimsamudayā kimjātikā kimpabhavā: ime
cattāro āhārā taṇhānidānā taṇhāsamudayā taṇhājātikā taṇhāpabhavā. Taṇhā cāyaṇ
bhikkhave kimnidānā ... : taṇhā vedanānidānā …... . Ñāṇamoli and Bodhi (cf. MN₁ 353)
translate: "Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of nutriment for the maintenance of
beings that already have come to be and for the support of those seeking a new exist-
ence. What four? They are: physical food as nutriment, gross or subtle; contact as the
second; mental volition as the third; and consciousness as the fourth. Now, bhikkhus,
these four kinds of nutriment have craving as their source, craving as their origin;
they are born and produced from craving. And this craving has what as its source ...?
Craving has feeling as its source ..." (and so on down to ignorance). See also SN
II.11-13, 98-104; MNÅ 1185, n. 120 and SNÅ 731, n. 18 and 19. Cp. AKBhed 153.8-9:
catvāra ime āhārā bhūtānāṁ sattvānām sthitaye yāpanāyai sambhavaiṣiṇām
cānugrahāyeti (see Pāsādika 1989: 66). See the discussion focussed on the four
nutriments at AKBh ad AK III.38d-41 (AKBhed 152.8-154.26). Further references at
PSP₁ 40, n. 3.
305 The quotation cited, namely, dvau dharmau lokam pālayato hrīś cāpatrāpyam ca,
in the view of the opponent, contradicts the mangala verses' declaration that
dependent-arising is “without separate things” (anānārtham), i.e., without diverse
things. Cf. AN I.51.19-21: dve 'me bhikkhave sukkā dhammā lokam pālenti. Katame158
and,
TRANSLATION
Coming (agamana) here from the other world, and going
(gamana) to the other world from this world ³06
1306
-how is that dependent-arising qualified by cessation and so forth
which the Exalted One³07 taught in this [above] way not contradicted?
[It is] of course (hi) precisely because cessation and so forth are
perceived for dependent-arising [by your party and others] that the
Master [Nāgārjuna], for the sake of teaching the distinction (vibhāga)
between [sūtras] with provisional meaning and sūtras with definitive
meaning (neyanītārthasūtrānta),308 composed this Madhyamakaśāstra.
dve? Hiri ca ottappañ ca. Cf. also AN I.83, 95; Iti 36; AK II.32; further references at
PSP₁ 40, n. 4.
306 The statement brought forth by the opponent, namely, paralokād ihāgamanam
ihalokāc ca paralokagamanam, is considered to confute the mangala ślokas' declara-
tion that dependent-arising is without coming or going (anāgamam anirgamam). Cf.
YŞVed 26.9-10: 'jig rten pha rol nas 'dir 'ongs pa dang | 'jig rten 'di nas 'jig rten pha
rol tu 'gro bar bstan pa An equivalent passage does not occur in the Pali Canon;
the citation may belong to the Canon of another school or be drawn from a muktaka-
sūtra; Candrakīrti could alternatively be paraphrasing or summarizing a scriptural
statement; cp. Udānavarga 3.12: ... samsāre tv āgatim gatim (parallels in Pāli Tripi-
taka Concordance under āgati).
... sa
307 The group
of citations is introduced in the Sanskrit by yat tarhi bhagavatoktam but
in the Tibetan only by equivalents for tarhi and bhagavatā. The Sanskrit's yat ..
construction is anacoluthic, in this case with a transition from a neuter to masculine
subject (on yat tarhi and yadā tarhi in elliptical usage, see Schmithausen 1987a: 570,
n. 1492). The PsP Tib translators may have revised the sentence because they were
disturbed by the change of subject. They present a relative-co-relative construction
that refers to pratītyasamutpāda ('o na bcom ldan ’das kyis [citations] zhes de ltar
rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba 'gag pa la sogs pas khyad par du byas pa bstan pa gang
yin pa de ji ltar 'gal bar mi 'gyur zhe na); the pronoun gang, the relative for the
demonstrative de (= sa), lacks a Skt equivalent. The translators' re-structuring
resulted in bhagavatā of the question after the citations not being translated, because
bhagavatā before the citations serves as the instrumental agent for the (nominalized)
verb bstan.
308 According to the Mādhyamikas, all sūtras but those which teach emptiness, non-
arising, etc., fall into the category of sūtras with provisional meaning, that is, sūtras
whose assertions require further interpretation and explanation. The sūtras with
provisional meaning are of value inasmuch as they serve the more propaedeutic159
In this regard, these [i.e.], the arising and so forth asserted for
dependent-arising [in the above Canonical statements, have] not
[been asserted] with reference to a [purported] own-being of the
object (visaya) of uncontaminated gnosis (anāsravajñāna) 309 of those
[persons] whose timira of ignorance has vanished. Rather, [they are
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
tr
purpose of gradually introducing to the path those whose minds are not yet ready to
comprehend the teaching of emptiness (see also the following Akṣayamatisūtra
quotation). Cf. YȘV where Candrakīrti compares the situation to that in the world
where certain things, even though they may be true, are not taught if they are not
necessary, and certain other things, although false, if considered necessary, are taught
('jig rten na bden yang mi dgos na ni kha cig mi bstan to || brdzun yang dgos pa yod
na ni la la bstan dgos te); because there exists a need for a means of entry to the
ultimate (don dam pa la 'jug pa’'i thabs; *paramārthāvatāropāya), the skandhas and
dhātus are taught in the beginning, but true reality (de kho na; tattva), emptiness, etc.,
are not because it would be pointless (see YȘVed 70.1-15; YȘV 235f.). In the CŚT
Candrakīrti quotes Pañcatantra I.389 in support of the idea that only persons fit to be
vessels of the teaching of selflessness are to be instructed in it: "For fools, teaching
[leads] to anger, not calm. For snakes, the drinking of milk only increases their
venom" (upadeśo hi mūrkhāṇām prakopāya na śāntaye | payaḥpānam bhujangāṇām
kevalam viṣavardhanam; see CST 265.5-8 and 410). See also PsP₁ 276.1-3 where
Candrakīrti asserts that doctrines such as the vijñānavāda, like the pudgalavāda of
the Sāmmitīyas, were taught by the Exalted One out of great compassion because
they are a means of attaining the ultimate view (paramārthadarśanopayabhūtatvāt;
the section is translated in Schayer 1931: 77). Interesting is the extended discussion
with the Yogācāra school at MABhed 181.11-202.4, in which Candrakīrti demotes the
sūtras considered by it to be definitive to the status of sutras with provisional
meaning. Cf. MA VI.97: evam jñātvā prakriyām āgamasya vyākhyātārtham yac ca
neyārtham uktam | sūtram buddhvā nīyatāṁ yan na tattvam nītārtham ca jñāyatām
śūnyatārtham || (Li 2012: 14); de ltar lung gi lo rgyus shes byas te || mdo gang de nyid
ma yin bshad don can || drang don gsungs pa’ang rtogs nas drang bya zhing || stong
nyid don can nges don shes par gyis || (MABhed 199.13-16; MABh 1911: 253)
Huntington's (1989: 168) translation of the first pāda as “One must therefore proceed
according to these guidelines when interpreting doctrinal passages
ed
is very free.
Cf. also the commentary: mdo sde gang dag skye ba med pa la sogs pas khyad par du
byas pa'i rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba dngos su gsal bar byed pa ma yin pa de dag ni
ji ltar rang bzhin med pa la 'jug pa’i rgyur 'gyur ba de Itar bshad par bya ste |
(MABhed 199.17-20; MABh 1911: 253f.). On neyārtha and nītārtha, see, e.g., May
1959: 298, n. 1089 (ref.); YȘV… 235, n. 449; Erb 1997: 200, n. 965; PSP₁ 597
(addition to 41, n. 1); see also Seyfort Ruegg 1985.
309⁹ Stcherbatsky's (1927: 125, n. 1) suggestion for the emendation of the text from
anāsrava to āsrava is based on de La Vallée Poussin's corrupt text and is thus inad-
missible.160
stated] with reference to the object of cognition of those [beings]
whose mind's eye is impaired by the timira of ignorance.
TRANSLATION
§72. In reliance on [his] vision of reality (tattva),310 the Exalted One
has, on the other hand, said:
For this, O monks, is the ultimate truth, namely, nirvāṇa, which
does not have a deceiving nature (amoṣadharma); all conditioned
things (samskāra),311 however, are false (mṛṣā), of a deceiving
nature.
312
310 Candrakīrti provides a grammatical gloss of tattva in his commentary on Y$ 30
(Y$ 30: sarvam astīti vaktavyam ādau tattvagaveșṣiṇaḥ || paścād avagatārthasya
niḥsangasya viviktatā): de’i dngos po ni de nyid do || brjod par 'dod pa’i don spyi’i
dngos po dang 'brel pa can de'i zhes bya ba 'di dang sbyar ro || dngos po ni rang gi
ngo bo ste gang gi rang gi ngo bo gang yin pa de ni de'i dngos po ste de kho na'o ||
1
rang gi ngo bo’o || ngo bo nyid do || de bzhin nyid do || gzhan ma yin pa nyid do || zhes
bya ba'i tha tshig go || (YȘVed 71.3-5). The newly found folio of the YȘ (transcribed
in Ye 2013) starts shortly after this. Scherrer-Schaub reconstructs: tasya bhāvas
tattvam || vivakṣitārthaḥ sāmānya-bhāva-sambandhī ‘tasya' ity anena sambadhyate ||
bhāvo hi svarūpam | yad yasya svarūpam tad dhi tasya bhāvaḥ | tattvam (see YȘVtr
237 and n. 457). Cf. PSP₁ 373.6-7: evam aparapratyayam bhāvānāṁ yat svarūpam tat
tattvam. See also La Vallée Poussin 1933: 38-47.
311 On sankhārā used in the sense of "conditioned things/factors," see Vetter 2000:
62f. Candrakīrti's commentary on MMK XIII.1 indicates that he understands sam-
skārāḥ of the kārikā and of the citation as equivalent to sarvadharmāḥ/sarvabhāvāḥ.
312 Cp. MN III.245.16-21: Tam hi bhikkhu musā yam mosadhammam tam saccam yam
amosadhammam nibbānam Etam hi bhikkhu paramam ariyasaccam yad idam
amosadhammam nibbānam. Bodhi (MNÅ 1093) translates: “For that is false, bhikkhu,
which has a deceptive nature, and that is true which has an undeceptive nature
Nibbāna". The Canonical statement cited here in the PsP is quoted again in Candra-
kīrti’s commentary on MMK XIII.1: etad dhi khalu¹ bhikṣavaḥ paramam satyam yad
idam² amoṣadharmam³ nirvāṇam sarvasamskārāś ca mṛṣā moṣadharmāṇaḥ (PsP₁
237.11-12); 'the PSP chapter one citation lacks khalu; the PsP chapter one citation
presents yaduta for yad idam; ³emended from amoṣadharma following mss P, B and
D. MMK XIII.1 is explained by Candrakīrti as being a reformulation of the Canon-
ical statement (MMK XIII.1: tan mṛṣā moṣadharmam¹ yad bhagavān ity abhāsata |
sarve ca moșadharmāṇaḥ samskārās tena te mṛṣā ||; ¹on the emendation moșa-
dharmam, see n. 325. MMK XIII.1 will be cited in §73). On moṣadharma(ka), see n.
314. Versions of the Canonical statement quoted by Candrakīrti appear six times in
the YSV; cf. YṢVed 27.16-18 where the single full YȘV citation reads dge slong dag
'di lta ste mi bslu ba'i chos can mya ngan las 'das pa 'di ni bden pa'i mchog gcig
pu'o || 'du byed thams cad ni brdzun pa bslu ba'i chos can no (PsP Tib for thePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
161
Similarly,
There is no truth (tathata) or inerrancy (avitathata) here;³13 this
has a deceptive nature (moṣadharmaka)314 and is as well subject
tr
statement in both chapter 1 and 13 differs). Scherrer-Schaub translates, "Mendiants,
ceci est la meilleure, l'unique vérité: à savoir, ce qui a pour nature de ne pas tromper:
l'extinction. Mais tous les samskāra sont faux et de nature trompeuse” (YȘV 122).
See YSV 122, n. 65 for further references. Candrakīrti quotes the statement in full in
MABh (see MABhed 119.17-19) and alludes to the same citation or cites a similar one
in CŚȚ: ata eva tan mṛṣāmoṣadharmakam yad etat samskṛtam ity uvāca śāstā (CŚŢed
164.8-9). De La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 41, n. 2) refers to the statement as cited in
BCAP ad BCA IX.2 (see BCAP 363.1-2 and note 1). Cp. Sn 147-148 (vv. 757-758).
313 The present context's reference to there not being tathatā here, i.e., in regard to
dependently arisen things, intends to advert to the fact that things are not truly as they
appear to be; their actual nature is otherwise. The tathatā and avitathatā of
dependent-arising are mentioned in the Pāli Canon (and thus assumed by the
Conservative Buddhist); cf. SN II.25.24-26.6: Jātipaccayā bhikkhave jarāmaraṇam.
avijjāpaccayā bhikkhave saṁkhārā uppādā vā tathāgatānam anuppādā vā tathāgatā-
nam || ṭhita vā sā dhātu ... idappaccayatā.... Avijjāpaccayā bhikkhave sankhārā || Iti
kho bhikkhave yā tatra tathatā avitathatā anaññathatā idappaccayatā || ayam vuccati
bhikkhave paṭiccasamuppādo ||; Schmithausen (1969: 105, n. 46) translates: “Die hier
[vorliegende] Wahrheit, Nichtunwahrheit, Nichtandersheit (d.h. die sich immer
bewahrheitende, niemals unzutreffende, unabänderliche Regel), [sc.] die Tatsache,
dass [etwas gerade] dies zu seiner Ursache hat: das nennt man das ‘Entstehen in
Abhängigkeit."" De La Vallée Poussin (La Vallée Poussin 1929: 743) comments: "Le
sense est probablement celui indiqué par Buddhaghosa, Visuddhi, p. 518: ‘le
Pratītyasamupāda est nommé tathatā parce qu'il y a production de tel et tel Dharma
en raison de telles et telles causes déterminées; avitathatā, parce que la production ne
manque jamais quand les causes sont présentes; anaññathatā, parce qu’un Dharma ne
naît des causes d'un autre Dharma."" Cf. Bodhi 2000: 742, n. 54.
In other instances, Candrakīrti employs the word tathatā to describe the ultimate
nature of things; the tathatā of things refers to the fact of their being without own
nature. Asked in his commentary on MMK XV.2 whether a real, independent own
nature of things exists, Candrakīrti replies that it neither exists nor does not exist by
own nature, but that for the sake of soothing the fear of hearers, it is said that one-it
having been superimposed from the point of view of surface truth-exists. PSP₁
264.11-265.2: yā sā dharmāṇāṁ dharmatā nāma saiva tatsvarūpam | atha keyam dha-
rmāṇām dharmatā | dharmāṇām svabhāvaḥ | ko 'yam svabhāvaḥ | prakṛtiḥ | kā ceyam
prakṛtiḥ | yeyam śūnyatā | naiḥsvābhāvyam | kim idam naiḥsvābhāvyam | tathatā |
keyam tathatā | tathābhāvo vikāritvam sadaiva sthāyitā | sarvadānutpāda eva hy
agnyādīnāṁ paranirapekṣatvād akṛtrimatvāt svabhāva ity ucyate. See the excursuses
on tathatā in La Vallée Poussin 1929: 743ff. and YȘV 213-215 (= n. 378). On
tathatā described in a positive sense, see Schmithausen 1976: 260 and references. On
dharmatā (as a synonym for dharmadhātu), see Schmithausen 1969: 145f.
tr162
.315
TRANSLATION
to ruin (pralopa);³¹5 this is also false (mṛṣā); an illusion (māyā) is
this, a deceiver of fools (bālalapinī).
316
Likewise,
Bodily material (rūpa) is like a clump of foam, feeling (vedanā)
similar to a bubble,
According to de La Vallée Poussin, the citation should also appear in Candrakīrti’s
commentary on MMK XIII.1. He inserts nāsty atra tathatā vā avitathatā vā (PsP₁
237.12-238.1) in square brackets before the citation moṣadharmakam apy etat | pra-
lopadharmakam apy etat, but notes that his insertion does not appear in his manu-
scripts or in PsP Tib (PsP₁ 238, n. 1). Vaidya (1960b: 104 and n. 1) misinterprets de
La Vallée Poussin's n. 1 as referring only to the vā after tathatā, and incorporates the
inserted material into his text (without brackets), noting that de La Vallée Poussin
has "tathatā vā for tathatā against Mss. and T." Neither ms P nor the paper manu-
scripts attest de La Vallée Poussin's inserted material (I do not have access to Q's
reading). Galloway (2001: 325 and n. 16) removes the inserted material.
314 Candrakīrti tends to understand moṣadharma(ka) as if it would be derived from
√muș and thus in the sense of "having a deceptive nature" (cf. PsP₁ 238.4 where he
equates moṣadharmaka with visamvādaka). It would, however, seem that its meaning
"liable to decay” “destined to vanish" (possibly intended by the original statement)
would also, given its placement, fit even here in the PSP, especially because the de-
ceptive nature of things is brought out by the words after pralopadharmaka, namely,
mṛṣā, māyā and bālalāpinī.
Pāli mosa (of mosadhamma) is formed from Pāli musā (musā = Skt mṛṣā, from √ mṛṣ
"to neglect" [von Hinüber 2001: § 122 notes that mṛṣā cannot be derived from
√mus]; cf. PTSD s.v. mosa; BHSD s.v. moșa). One expects a semantic difference
between mosa/moṣa and musā/mṛṣā since the derivation of the former from the latter
would otherwise be tautological. Oberlies (1995: 133) notes mosadharma in the
sense "liable to decay or loss" (with reference to Johnson's Saundarananda, where
moṣadharma is translated as “subject to loss”); see also MN-attha IV: 56 ad MN II
261: mosadhammā ti nassanasabhāvā and Oberlies 2001: § 12 (16). One notes that
mṛṣā can mean “in vain” “to no purpose" as well as "falsely."
315 moṣadharmakam apy etat | pralopadharmakamam apy etat is cited again at PSP₁
238.1. De La Vallée Poussin adverts to SN IV.205.4-6: Etam dukkhan ti ñatvāna |
mosadhammam palokinam | Phussaphussavayam (read, following SNN Phussa
phussa vayam) passam evam tatha virajjatīti (PsP₁ 598 to 41, n. 5; on the verse, see
|
also SN 1432, n. 228).
tr
3¹6 Cf. BHSD s.v. ullāpana (2): “deceitful, deceptive”; on bālalāpinī and its various
spellings, see Deleanu 2006: I, 321, n. 53. Cf. SN III.143.6-7: Etādisāyaṇ santāno ||
māyāyam bālalāpinī || vadhako eso akkhāto || sāro ettha na vijjati ||. SN-attha glosses:
ayam bālamahājanam lapāpanika-māyā nāma. Bodhi (2000: 953) translates bāla-
lāpinī as "beguiler of fools."PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
163
Ideation (sañjñā) is like a mirage, the impulses (samskāra)
similar to a plantain trunk,
[Primary] awareness (vijñāna) is like a magical illusion; [so] has
[it] been explained by the Kinsman of the Sun (ādityabandhu).³
317
319
Observing factors (dharma) thus, the monk with energy aroused,
Whether by day or in the night, aware (samprajāna) [and]
mindful (pratismṛta),
Would reach the peaceful place (padam śāntam), the calming of
the constituent elements 318 (samskāropaśama), [ultimate] welfare
(siva),
And [the understanding] that all dharmas are without self
(nirātman).
317
Cp. SN III.142.29-31: pheṇapiṇḍūpamam rūpam || vedanā bubbuļupamā || marīci-
kūpamā saññā | sankhārā kadalūpamā || māyūpaman ca viññānam || dipitādicca-
bandhunā ||.
Cited again at PsP₁ 549.2-4; also found at MABhd 22.3-5 and in CŚȚ (D 61b7-62a1):
gzugs ni dbu ba rdos pa 'dra || tshor ba chu yi chu bur bzhin || 'du shes smig rgyu Ita
bu ste || ’du byed rnams ni chu shing bzhin || rnam par ses pa sgyu ma ltar || nyi ma’i
gnyen gyis bka' stsal to (cp. PsP Tib). Cp. MABhed 165.9-12: rnam shes sgyu ma
dang mtshungs par || nyi ma’i gnyen gyis gsungs pa yin || de yi dmigs pa’ang de bzhin
te || nges par sgyur ma'i dngos dang 'dra ||.
Cited also in the PSP (see Lindtner 1979: 117.26-28), which has been ascribed by
Lindtner (ibid., 91-92) to the author of the PsP but is more probably a composition
by Candrakīrtipāda (eighth c.); the prajñā section, however, in which the verses are
cited, may have been authored by Candrakīrti the author of the PsP. Of the four
verses from the SN cited in the PSP, this specific verse, the initial one of seven in the
SN, appears as the third. This verse is also found in the TJ: gzugs ni dbu ba rdos pa
'dra || tshor ba chu bur dag dang mtshungs || 'du shes smig rgyu 'dra ba ste || 'du byed
rnams ni chu shing bzhin || rnam shes sgyu ma lta bu zhes || de nyid gzigs pas bka’
stsal to (P 77b2-3) and the Madhyamakaratnapradīpa: gzugs ni dbu ba rdos pa 'dra ||
tshor ba chu yi chu bur 'dra || 'du shes smig rgyu 'dra ba ste || 'du byed rnams ni chu
shing bzhin || rnam par shes pa sgyu ma ltar || nyi ma'i gnyen gyis gsungs pa yin (P
335b1-2). See also May 1959: 257, n. 924; Lamotte 1966: 358, n. 1 and 370, n. 2;
PSP₁ 41, n. 9. The Sanskrit is also cited in the Paramārtha-gāthā; see Wayman 1961:
170 (v. 17-18); my thanks to Yoshiaki Niisaku for this reference.
Adityabandhu/Adiccabandhu is frequently used as an epithet of the Buddha. Accord-
ing to Malalasekera (1974: 245 [see his other references]), the Vimanavatthu Com-
mentary states that like the Buddha, Ādicca, the sun, belonged to the Gotamagotta.
318 Given that dharmas, not the skandhas as in the Pāli version of the verse, are the
monk's object of observation in this Sanskrit verse, it is possible that Candrakīrti
understands samskārāḥ here in the sense of "the conditioned."164
TRANSLATION
319
Cp. SN III.143.8-9: evam khande avekkheyya || bhikkhu āraddhavīriyo || divāvāya
divārattim (read: divā vā yadi vā rattim) || sampajāno paṭissato ||. The three pādas
pratividhyet padam śāntam samskāropaśamam śivam | nirātmatvam ca dharmāṇām ||
do not appear in Pāli. I have tentatively appended as the present verse's final pāda
the emendation nirātmatvam ca dharmāṇām (P and Q read iti | [Q: ||] nirātmatvāc ca
dharmāṇām while the paper manuscripts read iti nirātmakatvāc ca dharmāṇām). P
and Q's nirātmatvāc ca dharmāṇām forms a pathyā pāda, but as a separate citation
intended to support Candrakīrti's viewpoint it is quite strange: the ablative has been
torn out of context, and the ca does not connect to anything. Also unusual is the lack
of a tathā introducing it: Candrakīrti usually introduces citations from new sources
with the word tathā, and there is not a tathā in any of the manuscripts before
nirātma(ka)tvāc ca dharmāṇām. PsP Tib, as de La Vallée Poussin has noted, presents
the verse in prose: de bzhin du | dge slong brtson 'grus brtsams pa dran pa dang shes
bzhin dang ldan pa nyin dang mtshan du chos la so sor rtog par byed pa na || 'du byed
thams cad ni nye bar zhi ba'i go 'phang zhi ba | chos rnams bdag med pa nyid rtogs
par 'gyur ro ||. It appears to be based on the reading nirātmatvam ca dharmāṇām (=
my emendation for the Skt) and includes this within the scope of the verb
pratividhyet, i.e., as part of the verse (cf. BHSD s.v. pratividhyati “penetrates…..
reaches, attains (a place) ... usually fig., penetrates intellectually, understands”).
Lambert Schmithausen informs me that the Chinese version of the sutra (T vol 2:
69a22) contains a reference to nairātmya in its translation of the verse corresponding
to the second verse in the Pāli version (rittakam tucchakam ...); it adds to the verse
the Chinese characters for "There is no self (*ātman) or anything belonging to a self
(*atmīya)." This addition of course by no means proves that Candrakīrti's source-
verse for the present PSP citation contained the line I append to it, or even that
Candrakīrti had access to a version of the second Pali verse like the one on which the
Chinese is based, but it does suggest that the conjecture may have some basis.
Certainly from the point of view of context the appended pāda transforms the verse
into much stronger scriptural support for the Mādhyamika viewpoint: with it, not
only is the goal of the reflecting monk, i.e., the “peaceful place," which is
characterized as the “calming of the constituent elements,” a main subject, but the
content of the monk's realization, the intellectual understanding that serves as the
means for his attainment of the "peaceful place," namely, the insight into the
selflessness of dharmas, is brought to the stage and spotlighted. The dharmas of the
final pāda, which are realized to be without self, are no other than the dharmas of the
first pāda. It is possible that PsP Tib was copied in from another Tibetan translation
of the verse, i.e., was not translated directly from PsP Skt, but this fact does not seem
to detract from the arguments that support the inclusion of the final pāda as part of
the verse, and may even provide them with further support.
The PSP, interestingly, presents the verse with two different pādas attached to it: de
ltar phung po la rtog pas || nyin mo dang ni mtshan rnams su || brtson 'grus brtsams
pa'i dge slong gis || shes bzhin so sor dran pa yis || 'du byed nyer zhi zhi ba yi || zhi
ba'i go 'phang rab tu 'thob || bde ba bla med dang ldan pa’i || mya ngan ʼ’das pa 'gro
bar 'gyur || (see Lindtner 1979: 117.29-32). The first four pādas, given as verse six in165
§73. [It was] for both [types of] trainees (vineyajana), [that is, on the
one hand, the trainee] who, inasmuch as [he] is unacquainted (ana-
bhijña) with the intent of the teachings, would in this way be
uncertain (sandeha) [and ask himself:] "Which here then is the
teaching with the meaning of true reality (tattva) [and] which [one]
can it be that is intentional (ābhiprāyika)?”,320 and also [on the other
hand, the trainee] who, being of weak intellect, understands a
teaching with provisional meaning as having definitive meaning, that
the Master [Nāgārjuna], for the sake of clearing away [their
respective] doubt (samsaya) and wrong understanding (mithyājñāna)
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
the Pāli group, are presented in the PSP as the fourth verse. The verse is quoted by
Candrakīrti at CŚT P 62a1-2 (again with chos rnams instead of phung po, but without
the final emended pāda of the present text or the final two of the PSP): de ltar chos
rnams rtog pa yi || dge slong brtson 'grus brtsams ldan zhing || nyin nam gal te mtshan
mo'ang rung || shes bzhin so sor dran Idan pa || 'du byed nyer zhi zhi ba yi || go 'phang
zhi ba rtogs par 'gyur ||. The Sanskrit is cited again at PsP₁ 549.5-7 (PsP Skt and Tib
again with dharmān/chos in place of Pāli khande; cf. also May 1959: 257, n. 925). De
La Vallée Poussin states that “le pāda evam dharmān vīkṣamāṇo est très incorrect"
but the quarter is in fact in ra-vipulā. I doubt that the Sanskrit on which PsP Tib is
based differed as drastically as de La Vallée Poussin's reconstruction of the Sanskrit
would have it (see PsP₁ 41, n. 10), and think rather that vīkṣamāṇo was translated as
so sor rtog par byed pa na (possibly to stress the meaning "respectively" of the prefix
vi), and pratividhyet as rtogs par 'gyur, a translation equivalent that occurs not
infrequently for prati√ vidh. The positioning of zhi ba suggests that śivam was indeed
in the Sanskrit (de La Vallée Poussin assumes it to be a translation for śāntam and
that śivam was lacking). The thams cad for which an equivalent Skt sarva is missing
could be evidence that the entire PsP Tib verse was copied from another Tibetan
translation of the verse (which had mistranslated the fifth and sixth pādas or was
based on Sanskrit that attested a slightly different fifth and sixth pāda) or, alterna-
tively, could indicate that śāntam in at least one of the PsP Tib exemplars had
suffered damage or had been misread by an earlier scribe: śa and sa can be misread
for each other in Śārada and other north Indian scripts of the eleventh and twelfth
centuries, the akṣara nta may have appeared as vva, and the final anusvāra may have
been interpreted as superscript r, all of which together may have led to a discounting
of the à in sā/sā. The change of the final pāda to an independent citation could have
been caused by a number of factors, such as the reading or interpretation of ᵒtvañ ca
as ᵒtvāñ ca and/or familiarity with the verse, only without the final seventh pāda.
Once separated from the verse, an iti was added to close the verse but, as stated, a
tathā to introduce the new "citation" was not.
320 For references, cf. Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 80, n. 116.166
by way of reasoning (yukti) and authoritative testimony (āgama),
undertook this [treatise].322 Among these, reasoning is indicated by
statements such as, "Not from self" (na svataḥ). Authoritative
testimony is indicated by way of statements such as,
323
TRANSLATION
321
323
The Exalted One has declared that that which has a deceiving
nature (moṣadharma) is false (mṛṣā),³
324
and all conditioned things (samskāra) have a deceiving nature;
therefore, they are false.325
321 On the term yukti, see Scherrer-Schaub 1981, and 1991: xi-xiii. For a discussion
of agama from the point of view of the epistemological school and as commented on
in the CŚ, see Tillemans 1990: I, 23-35.
322 Scherrer-Schaub (1991: xii-xiii) integrates a paraphrase of this sentence into her
discussion of yukti in the Avant-Propos to her edition and translation of the YȘV: “Le
recours au raisonnement et à l'Ecriture (yuktyāgamābhyām) a pour but d'écarter le
doute et la connaissance fausse de ceux qui en proie à l'incertitude ne reconnaissent
pas l'intention de l'enseignement du Bouddha et se demandent si tel enseignement se
réfère au sens vrai (tattvārtha) ou bien s'il a été dit avec une intention; et pour ces
êtres niais qui comprennent comme de sens déterminé un enseignement qui est à
interpréter." One might merely note that "connaissance fausse" is a characteristic
only of the second sort of trainee. A large part of the paragraph is freely translated in
Thurman 1991: 258.
Candrakīrti is referring to MMK I.1.
324 PSP Tib for MMK XIII.1ab, both here in chapter one and in chapter thirteen,
presents bcom ldan 'das kyis chos gang zhig || slu ba de ni brdzun zhes gsungs ||, with
slu ba (moșa) not compounded with chos (dharma), but rather used predicatively. It
is compounded with chos in the third pāda: 'du byed thams cad slu ba’i chos. The
kārikā has been copied in from Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan's translation but
Pa tshab has slightly revised pādas a and b; ABh, BP, and PP read chos gang slu ba
de brdzun zhes || bcom ldan 'das kyis de skad gsungs || (for variants, see Ye 2011a:
210).
325 Candrakīrti is citing MMK XIII.1: tan mṛṣā moṣadharmam yad bhagavān ity
abhāṣata | sarve ca moṣadharmāṇaḥ samskārās tena te mṛṣā ||. The kārikā is trans-
lated, e.g., in Schayer 1931: 26, Saito 1984: 179, Oetke 1992: 206, Ames 1996: 126,
Garfield 1995: 35, 207, Galloway 2001: 338, Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 80. Nāgārjuna and
his commentators understand (falsely sanskritized) moșa to be a derivative of √muș
“to rob, steal”; see MMK XIII.2. At PsP₁ 238.4 Candrakīrti equates moṣadharmaka
with visamvādaka. Retorting to his opponent in his introduction to MMK XIII.2, he
states: satyam moṣadharmakāḥ sarvasamskārāḥ ye 'dyāpi bhavantam muṣnanti “It is
true that all the conditioned factors have a deceiving nature, [to the extent] that they167
The Great Sage (mahāmuni) has said that an initial point (koti) is
not known,
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
326
For samsāra ³26 is without lower or upper [limit] (anavarāgra); it
has neither a beginning (ādi) nor an end (paścima).³27
fool you even today!" See the references and discussion of moșadharma in Schayer
1931: 26, n. 20; see also Saito 1984: 277f., n. 6; Oetke 1992: 206ff.
Even though Candrakīrti unambiguously indicates with his employment of
moṣadharmaka when he paraphrases and elaborates on the kārikā that he understands
moṣadharmam of XIII.1 to be a bahuvrīhi compound, Galloway (2001: 334, n. 8 and
9) rejects that it is a bahuvrīhi and translates (338) the compound as a karmadhāraya
(with a plural final member): “What are deceptive (moșa) dharmas are false (mṛṣā),
the Lord has said; All the samskāras are deceptive dharmas, therefore they are false."
Galloway also translates (a)moṣadharma of Candrakīrti's citation of the Canonical
statement reflected in MMK XIII.1 as a karmadhāraya. Garfield (1995: 35, 207),
without explanation, does not translate dharma/chos and adds an unattested “all" to
the final pāda. He (ibid., 207, n. 69) points out Kalupahana's wrong understanding of
samskāra as "dispositions,” but chooses the infelicitous yet widely used translation
"compounded phenomena" for samskāra in its broader sense. samskāra in this sense
refers rather to all phenomena that are formed/fashioned/activated (samskṛta) by
causes. According to Abhidharma scholasticism, the individual atom-like "free-
floating" qualities which are also samskāras―of which molecules are composed
are caused (samskṛta) but are partless, i.e., they are not “compounded." "Conditioned
things/factors" is thus a more accurate translation for samskāra in such contexts.
On the metrically required emendation moșadharmam for PsP's moṣadharma (in
both MMK XIII.1a and XIII.2a), see MacDonald 2007: 34f. The version of the sutra
Nāgārjuna relied upon may additionally have attested this reading (the nominative
plural moṣadharmāṇaḥ of XIII.1c, on the other hand, accords with Pā 5.4.124: the
word dharma, when preceded by a single word in a bahuvrīhi compound, becomes
dharman). Candrakīrti provides the sūtra citation in his commentary on MMK
XIII.1: sūtra uktam tan mṛṣā moṣadharmam¹ yad idam samskṛtam | etad dhi khalu
bhikṣavaḥ paramam satyam yad idam amoṣadharmaṇ² nirvāṇam | sarvasamskārāś ca
mṛṣā moṣadharmāṇaḥ iti (cp. PsP₁ 237.11-12); ¹emended following mss P, B and D;
2emended following mss P, B and D.
samsāra literally means "the rushing through, the wandering through [a series of
places or states]." It refers to the crossing over of a being into ever new existences
and thus to the chain of existences experienced (cf. L. Schmithausen, Historisches
Wörterbuch der Philosophie. Ed. J. Ritter u. K. Gründer. Band 8, R-Sc., Basel 1992,
s.v. samsāra). The opponent in Candrakīrti's PsP introduction to MMK XVI.1
explains the word samsāra as follows: iha samsaraṇam samsṛtiḥ gater gatyantaraga-
manam samsāra ity ucyate (PSP₁ 280.3-4). The Conservative Buddhist in YSV
asserts that samsāra exists having the nature of an entity because it has the own
nature of the five constituent elements; just these, propelled from destiny to destiny
by action and defilements, are called samsāra: 'khor ba ni nye bar len pa'i phung po168
TRANSLATION
tr
Inga'i rang gi ngo ba yin pas dngos po'i ngo bo ste | nye bar len pa'i phung po Inga
po de dag nyid las dang nyon mongs pas 'phangs nas | 'gro ba rnams su 'gro ba nas
'gro ba gzhan du 'gro ba'i phyir | 'khor ba zhes bya bas na de yang yod do || (YSV ed
33.6-10; YSV 135f.). Although oft translated as "cyclic existence" or "round
existence" these translations are, strictly speaking, actually more appropriate for
samsāracakra, "the wheel of samsāra," the reference being to the (sometimes pictor-
ially represented) group of five or six destinies continuously and repeatedly
wandered through by beings in an order determined by the respective karma of the
individual being. "Cyclic existence," "round of existence," etc., however, tend to be
used to translate samsāra because the idea of wandering around within a closed
system is often implicitly or secondarily intended. See n. 336.
327 Candrakīrti is citing MMK XI.1: pūrvā prajñāyate koțir nety uvāca mahāmuniḥ |
samsāro ’navarāgro hi nāsyādir nāpi paścimam ||. Translated, e.g., in May 1959: 170.
The unemended Tibetan for the first two quarters of the kārikā here in the first
chapter differs: sngon mtha' sngon nam zhes zhus tshe || thub pa chen pos min zhes
gsungs ||. May (170, n. 540) notes the same discrepancy between PsP Skt and PSP Tib
(he used P and N; D and C also read sngon) for the kārikā in the eleventh chapter and
reconstructs (literally, not with a view to creating a metrically correct śloka) “pūrva-
kotiḥ pūrvam asti?' iti pṛṣṭe mahāmunir nety uvāca” and translates, “à la question: ‘y
a-t-il une extrémité antérieure, un 'avant'?' le grand Anachorète répond: 'non'."
Given that the differences between PsP Skt and PsP Tib are difficult to explain in
terms of misreadings of the Sanskrit, I think it is more reasonable to assume that the
Tibetan translators (here the reference is to Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan,
since the citation has been copied into PsP Tib) found the same Sanskrit text in their
manuscript and only expanded on it, that is, they added nam zhus tshe in order to
clarify their understanding of pūrvā prajñāyate koțiḥ as a question; the sngon which
May considers to be translating an original pūrvam is probably merely the result of
an auditory or carving error for mngon, a common equivalent for prajñāyate. A
glance at MMK XI.1 as preserved in MMK, D, and in ABh and BP confirms this: all
attest the correct reading sngon mtha' mngon nam zhes zhus tshe (see MMK, D 7a7;
ABhed 358.13; BPed 159.18; MMK, P attests, as PSP Tib does, the faulty sngon).
Candrakīrti presents in his commentary on MMK XI.1 the sūtra quotation he
considers Nāgārjuna to be referring to: uktam ca bhagavatā anavarāgro hi bhikṣavo
jātijarāmaraṇasamsāra iti (PSP₁ 218.2-3; 219.5-6; references for jātijarāmaraṇa-
samsāraḥ in BHSD under anavarāgra). Cp. SN II.178.8-10, 186.13-15; III.149.25-
27, 151.3-5, etc. (see also PSP₁ 218, n. 3): Anamataggāyam bhikkhave samsāro
pubbakoți (SN: pubbākoṭi) na paññāyati avijjānīvaraṇānaṁ sattānam taṇhāsamyo-
janānam sandhāvatam samsaratam ||. Bodhi (2000: 651, etc.) translates, “Bhikkhus,
this samsāra is without discoverable beginning. A first point is not discerned of
beings roaming and wandering on hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving" (at
795, n. 254, he notes that the SN-aṭṭha explains that samsāra is the uninterrupted
succession of the aggregates, etc.). For anamatagga see PTSD, CPD. For muni, see
YSV 106, n. 11; May 1959: 170, n. 539; Candrakīrti elaborates on the word muni in
trPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
169
And in the Advice to Kātyāyana, both “[it] exists” (asti) and “[it]
does not exist" (nāsti) have been negated by the Exalted One
who understands 328 existence (bhava) and non-existence (abhā-
va).329
§74. And it is stated in the Noble Akṣayamatisūtra,
Which sūtras have a provisional meaning (neyārtha), which a
definitive meaning (nītārtha)? Those sutras that have been taught
for entry (avatāra) onto the path are called [sūtras] with provi-
sional meaning. Those sutras that have been taught for entry into
CŚT with aśaikṣyakāyavāṁmanomaunayogān munir buddho bhagavān (CŚTed
164.13).
Garfield (1995: 197) translates the kārikā rather freely from the Tibetan as "When
asked about the beginning, [t]he Great Sage said that nothing is known of it. Cyclic
existence is without end and beginning. So there is no beginning or end." The first
quarter actually translates, as May has already shown, "When asked, 'Is a prior point
known?' .." Garfield's overinterpretation of the simple min (“[one] is not") with
"nothing is known of it" is misleading, for it implies that the Buddha does indeed
affirm the existence of a beginning, but that not even he has access to details about it
(Garfield's "So" is also unsupported; the third quarter commences with de la [=
asya]). PsP Tib's equivalent for hi might be represented by the semi-final particle of
the preceding pāda; for comments on hi represented by semi-final particles, see
Schmithausen 2014 § 349.
328
I translate vibhāvinā as “who understands" (PsP Tib: mkhyen) but "who dis-
closes/teaches [the truth regarding] ..." is also possible (ABh and BP: ston pa).
Kumārajīva's translation (T 30.1564: 20b1) suggests "who causes to disappear"
("The Buddha destroys existence and non-existence”).
329 Candrakīrti is citing MMK XV.7: kātyāyaṇāvavāde cāstīti nāstīti cobhayam |
pratişiddham bhagavatā bhāvābhāvavibhāvinā ||. Translated, e.g., in Schayer 1931:
69. See SN II.17: Dvayanissito khvāyam Kaccāyana loko yebhuyyena atthitañ ceva
natthitañ ca || ... Sabbam atthīti kho Kaccāyana ayam eko anto || Sabbam natthīti ayam
dutiyo anto || Ete te Kaccāyana ubho ante anupagamma majjhena Tathāgato
dhammam deseti || Avijjāpaccayā sankhārā || sankhārapaccayā viññāṇam || pe ||.
Candrakīrti commences his commentary on the kārikā as follows (punctuation
revised): uktam hi bhagavatā āryakātyāyaṇāvavādasūtre yadbhūyasā kāṭyāyana ayam
loko 'stitām vā abhiniviṣṭo nāstitām ca | tena na parimucyate jātijarāvyādhimaraṇa-
śokaparidevaduḥkhadaurmanasyopāyāsebhyo, na parimucyate pāñcagatikāt sam-
sāracārakāgārabandhanāt, na parimucyate pitṛmaraṇasamtāpaduḥkhāt, na pari-
mucyate pitṛmaraṇasamtāpaduḥkhād iti vistaraḥ. The kārikā is also cited at MABhed
22.13-14 (minus PsP Tib's semantically empty but potentially misleading ’ang in the
final quarter; gnyi ga'ang is equivalent to ubhāv api "both of them").170
TRANSLATION
the result (phala) are called [sūtras] with definitive meaning.
330
330 Ms Q, unlike ms P and the paper manuscripts, includes after yāvad ye sūtrāntāḥ a
sentence detailing the topics of neyārthasūtras: ātmasatvajīvapoṣapudgalamanujamā-
navakārakavedaka (read vedakā) nānārutabhāṣā asvāmikāḥ svāmikavan¹ nirddiṣṭās
ta ucyamte neyārthāḥ yāvad ye sutrāntāḥ. 'read sasvāmikavan? PsP Tib: bdag po
dang bcas pa(r). PsP Tib also includes the entire sentence: mdo sde gang dag bdag
dang sems can dang | srog dang gso ba dang | skyes bu dang | gang zag dang | shed
las skyes dang | shed bu dang | byed pa po dang | tshor ba po dang | sgra rnam pa sna
tshogs su bshad pa dang | bdag po med pa la bdag po dang bcas par bstan pa de dag
ni drang ba’i don zhes bya’o ||. De La Vallée Poussin assumes that Candrakīrti (or a
scribe?) abridged the text (“Le copiste abrège” [PsP₁ 43, n. 3]); he reconstructs the
Sanskrit from the Tibetan (cf. ibid.) but does not include the reconstruction in his
main text. Like the majority of the citations in our chapter, PsP Tib has, however,
been copied in from its source text, in the present case the Tibetan translation of the
Akṣayamatisūtra (cf. Braarvig 1993: 117f.; [tr. 451]), and thus does not necessarily
indicate that the sentence was originally in PsP Skt. It is even possible that the extra
sentence was copied into PsP Tib by mistake; see MacDonald 2015, where it is
hypothesized that apprentice translators or assistants may have been responsible for
searching out source texts and copying in citations, and that missing or extra text in
the copied-in citations could be due to their oversights. On the other hand, the fact
that ms Q presents the same sentence appears to indicate that this sentence also stood
in one of manuscripts relied upon by Pa tshab and the paṇḍitas helping him, and was
thus included when the larger citation was copied from the Tibetan translation of the
Akṣayamatisūtra. The complete lack of the sentence, however, in ms P and in the
paper manuscripts raises suspicions, especially because one expects that if Q had
received the sentence from ms ß over ms , P would have it too, via either ms G or
ms ɛ, or via both ms and ms ɛ. It could be argued that the lack of the sentence in P
and the paper manuscripts can be explained as due to a simple eyeskip on the part of
ms e's scribe from ye sūtrāntāḥ (ātma°) to ye sūtrāntāḥ (śunyatā°), and due to the fact
that P's scribe was relying solely on ms ɛ, i.e., was not checking the readings in ms
at this point in his copying. These and other arguments for inclusion of the sentence
in question in the main PsP text, however, weaken considerably when Q's wording is
taken into account. Q's sentence describing the topics of provisional sūtras com-
mences with yāvad ye sūtrāntāḥ, and its next sentence detailing the topics of defini-
tive sūtras begins with yāvad ye sūtrāntāḥ. The yāvat before ye sūtrāntāḥ śunyatā°
has obviously been included by Candrakīrti for the purpose of indicating that he has
abridged the citation and left out the sentence commenting on the topics of provi-
sional sūtras (i.e., yāvat is used in its BHS sense indicating omission of part of a
citation). His emphasis at this stage in the discussion is on the fact that only sūtras
which teach that things do not arise, etc., are definitive, and he has purposely
excluded the sentence detailing the subjects of provisional sūtras because it is not
pertinent to the point he is making. Q's sentence must therefore represent an inter-
polation. It is possible that the individual who decided to add the “missing” sentence
to the manuscript he was using or copying simply forgot to delete the word yāvatPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
171
The sutras [i.e., those in which] the doors to release
(vimokṣamukha)331 have been taught-[such as] emptiness
(sunyatā), the absence of marks/phenomena (ānimitta), the lack
of something to long for (apraṇihita), the lack of making effort
toward [anything involving prapañca] (anabhisamskāra), the
unborn (ajāta), non-arising (anutpāda), non-existence (abhāva),
[the fact that one] lacks a self (nirātman), lacks a being
(nihsattva), lacks a soul (nirjīva), lacks a person (niḥpudgala),
before ye sutrāntāḥ and the added sentence. The fact that yāvad ye sūtrāntāḥ also
introduces the sentence dealing with definitive sūtras in ms Q may indicate that the
sentence was brought into the main text without much thought; it may have originally
been written in the margin (without yāvat) and was later added by a scribe who did
not delete the main text's yāvat and who again copied yāvad ye sūtrāntāḥ as the
introductory words for the sentence dealing with definitive sūtras.
331 Normally only the three forms of concentration mentioned first in the list, i.e.,
śūnyatā, ānimitta, and apraṇihita are referred to as the "doors to release” (vimokṣa-
mukha); see Lamotte 1970: 1213-1232; May 1959: 148, n. 436; Conze 1967: 59-69;
further references in Tillemans 1990: 241, n. 193. Candrakīrti describes the charac-
teristics of the three vimokṣamukhas in MA VI.208cd-209 and his commentary:
śūnyatā as a vimokṣamukha has the characteristic of isolation (*vivikta) because,
since things/existence are/is not perceived, one is not soiled by the stain of
conceptuality (MABhed 319.1-3: dngos po ma dmigs pas rnam par rtog pa’i dri mas
nye bar ma sbags pa’i phyir na | rnam par thar pa'i sgo stong pa nyid ni rnam par
dben pa'i mtshan nyid can no ||). ānimitta as a vimokṣamukha has the characteristic of
calm (*śānta) inasmuch as a mark/phenomenon is not perceived (MABhed 319.7-8:
rnam par thar pa'i sgo mtshan ma med pa ni mtshan ma ma dmigs pa'i sgo nas zhi
ba'i mtshan nyid can no ). apraṇihita as a vimokṣamukha has the characteristic of
absence of suffering and of confusion/disorientation (*duḥkha, *moha) because when
one accurately examines conditioned things which have the nature of suffering and
sees by way of insight conditioned things' [true] own-being, one does not wish [for
them] (see Tauscher 1981, 148, n. 249, where he explains, following Jayānanda, that
from the point of view of the surface-level truth, things are not desired because they
are seen as suffering; MABhed 319.9-13: rnam par thar pa'i sgo smon pa med pa 'di
ni sdug bsngal dang gti mug med pa’i mtshan nyid can te | 'du byed sdug bsngal gyi
bdag nyid can rnams la yang dag par rjes su lta zhing shes rab kyis 'du byed kyi rang
bzhin la lta ba na smon par mi byed pa'i phyir na ). The section is translated in
Tauscher 1981: 81f. See also PSP₁ 246.6-8. In the CŚȚ, Candrakīrti proclaims
śūnyatā as the unrivalled door to release: yady api śūnyatānimittāpraṇihitākhyāni
trīņi vimokṣamukhāni tathāpi nairātmyadarśanam eva pradhānam [/] vidita-
nairātmyasya hi bhāveṣu parikṣīṇasangasya na kvacit kācit prāṛthanā kuto vā
nimittopalambha ity advitīyam eva śivadvāram etan nairātmyam (CŚṬed 270.2-6; cf.
CST 127). On apranihita, see Schmithausen 1987b: 153f.; Deleanu 2000: 93, n. 23.
tr172
TRANSLATION
lacks a ruler (asvāmika) [all those] are called definitive.332 This,
O Bhadanta Son of Śāradvatī, is called reliance on definitive
sūtras, not reliance on sūtras with provisional meaning.333
And similarly, in the Noble Samādhirājasūtra,
He knows the distinguishing feature of definitive sūtras to be
emptiness as taught by the Well-gone One (sugata).
But where the person (pudgala), being (sattva) [and] soul /
[enduring] individual (pūrușa) [are taught], all these dharmas (=
sūtras) he knows to be of provisional meaning.
334
332 The sentence listing the topics of definitive sutras is problematic, for it is difficult
to know how to construe mukhā with nirdiṣṭāḥ. PsP Tib (= Akṣayamatisūtra Tib)
appears to understand nirdiṣṭāḥ in an active sense, even though nirdiṣṭāḥ of the pre-
vious two sentences has been understood in the expected passive sense. De La Vallée
Poussin (PSP₁ 43, n. 4), citing the end of the sentence in PsP Tib (gang zag med pa
dang bdag po med pa dang | rnam par thar pa'i sgo'i bar du bstan pa de dag ni nges
pa'i don zhes bya ste | 'di dag ni nges pa’i don gyi mdo sde la rton gyi | drang ba’i
don gyi mdo sde la mi rton pa zhes bya'o), remarks "La syntaxe de cette phrase paraît
troublée"; he reconstructs the extra sentence in PsP Tib dealing with provisional
sūtras in the form yeṣu sūtrānteṣu te neyārthāḥ. I translate nirdiṣṭāḥ in its passive
sense and in reliance on BHSG § 7.14 add the bracketed words at the beginning of
the sentence. Understanding the sentence like this requires assuming that mukhā is
an error for ᵒmukhāni, or that it is to be understood as a neuter plural. Braarvig
(1993: 451) does not comment on either the Sanskrit or the Tibetan syntax, and for
the sentence dealing with the topics of definitive sūtras translates nirdiṣṭāḥ in an
active sense: "... the scriptures teaching emptiness and the gates of liberation are
called explicit." The problem with assuming that ᵒvimokṣamukhā is the final item in
the list is that sūnyatā, ānimitta, and apraṇihita are the "gates of liberation." Seyfort
Ruegg (2002: 81) does not comment on the syntax of the sentence, but obviously
aware of the difficulty, translates, “When in Sūtrāntras there are taught Emptiness …..,
these are termed of definitive meaning."
333 The PSP manuscripts have preserved the Sanskrit for these sentences of the Aksa-
yamatisūtra. Braarvig (1993: 167) includes the PsP₁ 43 citation in his list of frag-
ments, but in his translation (ibid., 451) presents both it and de La Vallée Poussin's
reconstruction from the Tibetan of the sentence dealing with provisional sūtras (the
latter should not be marked in bold as a Sanskrit fragment [ms Q, however, now
provides us with the Sanskrit]). On the four reliances as described in the Akṣayamati-
sūtra, see ibid., 443-453; see also de La Vallée Poussin's comments on the pratisara-
nas at PSP₁ 598 for 43, n. 5.
334 Cf. SR chapter 7, verse 5 (SR p. 36.1-4). Cited again by Candrakīrti at PsP₁ 276.5-
8. Cited in MABh in the context of a discussion on distinguishing nītārtha- and173
§75. Therefore, the Master [Nāgārjuna] undertook the explication of
dependent-arising in order to demonstrate that the teaching of arising,
etc., has a false meaning (mṛṣārtha).
335
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§76. [Objection:] But if, in consideration of the fact that arising, etc.,
do not exist, the Master [Nāgārjuna] undertook this [explanation] for
the sake of demonstrating that all factors (dharma) are false (mṛṣā),
[then] it being thus [i.e., that things are false], since that which is false
does not exist, isn't it the case that unwholesome (akusala) actions do
not exist, [and] due to their non-existence the bad destinies (durgati)
do not exist, [and] wholesome (kuśala) actions [as well] do not exist,
[and] due to their non-existence the good destinies (sugati) do not
exist, and on account of the impossibility of good and bad destinies³
336
neyārtha-sūtras (see MABhed 200.7-10 and MABh 1911: 254). I follow de La Vallée
Poussin in understanding dharmas to be referring to sūtras: “il connaît que tous ces
dharmas (= sūtras) sont de sens provisoire." Somewhat disturbing is the fact that
upadista would seem to complete the predicate of the yasmin sentence in the second
line but is included in an attributive element in the first line (emptiness, as the Sugata
taught it). One wonders if yatho° might be the secondary Sanskritization (metri
causa) of Middle Indian yattho° = yatroᵒ, and if the line might originally have been
understood as "He knows that the special kind of sūtras which are of definitive
meaning are those where emptiness has been taught by the Sugata" or "He knows the
distinguishing feature of sūtras which are of definitive meaning to be [the fact] that
in them emptiness has been taught by the Sugata.”
335
mṛṣārtha modifies utpādādideśanā and thus has to be understood as meaning that
the teaching has, from the ultimate perspective, a false object/content. When
mṛṣārtha appears again a few lines later (mṛṣārthatā bhāvānāṇ), however, it seems
to mean no more than mṛṣā.
336 On the terms kuśala and akusala, see Schmithausen 2013. Candrakīrti concurs
with the AK in considering samsāra to consist of five gatis (AK III.4ab: narakādi-
svanāmoktā gatayaḥ pañca teṣu [teșu refers to the three realms]); they are listed at
AKBhed 114.7: narakās tiryañcaḥ pretā devā manuṣyā (cp. PsP₁ 218.1-2: pāñcagatike
samsāre; YSV ed 32.23: 'gro ba Ingar 'khor ba). Six gatis are mentioned at MABhed
175.17 but here Candrakīrti is quoting another text (see MABh₁ 1910: 356).
Bhāviveka refers to six gatis in MHK I.19: kṛtapunyatayodyānayātrām iva ca
ṣaḍgatim | paśyantas trāsam āyānti na te samsāracārakāt || (Lindtner 2001: 3;
Heitmann [2009: 47] reads api instead of iva [Tib: Itar]). On the gatis, see YȘV 134,
n. 89; Lamotte 1976: 1953-1959 and 1988: 630.
tr174
TRANSLATION
samsāra does not exist? Therefore all undertakings would be
absolutely (eva) futile (vaiyarthya)!337
Reply: Taking reference to surface truth, we teach the falseness
(mṛṣārthatā) of things as an antidote to worldly attachment to [things]
as true (idamsatyābhiniveśa). But the Nobles, by whom the task has
338
337 The Conservative Buddhist opponent objects that should samsāra, consisting of
good and bad destinies which are arrived at by way of wholesome and unwholesome
acts, not exist, there would be no point in cultivating wholesome mental, verbal, and
physical behaviours and avoiding unwholesome ones. Not explicitly stated in the
opponent's objection but certainly implied is the accusation that the Mādhyamika is a
nihilist. In its classical Indian sense the nihilist label (nāstika) characterizes a person
who denies the causal efficiency of karma and thus rebirth as the result of wholesome
and unwholesome actions. Candrakīrti responds variously in his works to the charge
that the Madhyamika is a nihilist, on occasion arguing that a nihilist deserving of the
name denies something he has earlier affirmed, and this the Mādhyamika does not
do. Here in PSP chapter one, he first clarifies to his opponent that the things the world
perceives out of ignorance and clings to because of the belief in their reality have
actually never existed, but are spoken of by the Mādhyamika and taught as being
false solely for the sake of breaking the world's attachment to them. He then confines
his response to the ultimate level, speaking from the point of view of the Nobles who
see reality, those beings who have “completed the task” (kṛtakāryāḥ; according to
Candrakīrti in his commentary on YȘ, the task the Nobles have completed is not to
perceive any thing and not to perceive arising and perishing; this is known as nirvāṇa
in seen things [see YȘVed 47.1-14; YȘVÅ 171]). Inasmuch as the Nobles perceive
nothing at all, there is not an object of which it might be predicated that it “is false"
or “is not false” and that as a result might be deemed inexistent or existent. For the
Nobles, whose realization of the lack of existence of things has freed them from the
bonds of karma and released them from samsāra, actions and the various destinies
they lead to have become irrelevant.
tr
338
tr
The compound idamsatyābhiniveśa (Pāli: idamsaccābhinivesa) appears in the
Canon as one of the four "bodily knots” (kāyagrantha; Pāli: kāyagantha); see DN
III.230; SN V.59; DS 201 (§ 1135) (further references in Erb 1997: 152, n. 500,
YȘV 249, n. 483). The other three “knots” are covetousness (abhidhyā; Pāli: abhi-
jjhā), malevolence (vyāpāda; Pāli: byāpāda), and clinging to observances and vows
(śīlavrataparāmarśa; Pāli: silabbataparāmāsa). DS 202 (§ 1139) elucidates the kāya-
gantha idamsaccābhinivesa as follows: tattha katamo idamsaccābhiniveso kāya-
gantho? Sassato loko idam eva saccam mogham aññan ti vā; asassato loko, idam eva
saccam mogham aññan ti vā; antavā loko, idam eva saccam mogham aññan ti vā;
anantavā loko, idam eva saccam mogham aññan ti vā ... (referred to are the extreme
views [drsți: the world is permanent, not permanent, the world has an end, does not
have an end, etc.] in regard to which the Buddha tended to maintain silence; see, e.g.,
Oetke 1994, Vetter 1988 [chapter eleven], May 1959: 277, n. 1015). idamsaccābhi-PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
175
been completed (kṛtakārya), certainly do not perceive something that
might be false or not false. Moreover, do acts (karman) exist or does
samsāra exist for the one who has discerned the falseness of all
factors (dharma)?³³9 [Definitely not!] Nor is it the case that this one
perceives the existence (astitva) or non-existence (năstitva) of any
factor.
As stated by the Exalted One in the Noble Ratnakūṭasūtra,
For the mind (citta), Kāśyapa, being searched for, is not found.
That which is not found is not perceived. That which is not
nivesa, according to the DS, is expressed in the stubborn holding to such views with
the belief and attitude “only this (idam) is true (sacca), [everything] other [than this
view I hold] is false (mogha) (cf. also MN I.484f., 498f.). The same words are found
in ŚSV ed 226.5-7 (... mngon par zhen pas 'di dag kho na bden par yod la gzhan ni
rmongs pa'o zhes 'di dag la bden par mngon par zhen pa mchog tu 'dzin pa lus kyi
mdud pa skyed pas 'khor bar 'khor); the view held as true by the opponents in this
SSV context, however, is not found among those appearing in Canonical literature
and is rather, according to the Mādhyamikas who target it, the soteriologically disas-
trous view held by common persons that things, here specifically the eye, truly exist.
Erb (1997: 56f.) translates: "Durch das Festhalten an dieser [Vorstellung] erzeugen
sie die Bindung an den Körper [in Gestalt] des Sich-Anklammerns (mchog tu 'dzin
pa; *parāmarśa), d.h., des hartnäckigen Festhaltens an dieser [Vorstellung] als wahr,
in dem Gedanken: 'Nur diese [Vorstellung] ist wahr, [alles] andere ist falsch', und
kreisen dadurch im Kreislauf der Existenzen." As Erb notes (ibid. 152, n. 500), here,
as in other cases, an older concept has been appropriated and filled with a new con-
tent: in the Canonical literature, the permanence of the world is doubted, but never its
reality, and it is just this belief in its reality that Candrakīrti applies as the content of
idamsatyābhiniveśa (for a detailed description of another case of the re-filling of old
Canonical "skins" with new content, see Schmithausen 1976). idamsatyābhiniveśa as
a kāyagrantha is similarly mentioned in the commentary on YṢ kārikā 32 in which,
following Candrakīrti, Nāgārjuna states that in the beginning the Exalted One taught
the existence of the results of actions and the existence of the various destinies and
afterwards taught their non-arising and that one ought to attain thorough knowledge
of their [true] nature; see YŞVed 73.16-17: 'di bden no snyam du mngon par zhen pa
mchog tu'dzin pa lus kyi mdud pa 'di'i gnyen por |; see YȘV 251 and n. 483 and
Erb's comments on *parāmarśa (*idamsatyābhiniveśaparāmarśakāyagrantha) as it
appears in ŚSV and YSV.
tr
339 I understand the hi in the sentence to indicate the rhetorical character of the
question, and thus the sentence as equivalent to the negative construction na hi yena
tasya karmāṇi santi ...; I therefore add the rhetorical question's implied negation
in square brackets.176
TRANSLATION
perceived is neither past, nor future, nor present. That which is
neither past, nor future, nor present does not have own-being
(svabhāva). There is no arising (utpāda) of that which does not
have own-being. There is no perishing (nirodha) of that which
does not have arising. ³
340
But he who, on account of being steeped in [subjective] error
(viparyāsa), does not understand that things (dharma) are false, [who]
is attached to an own-being of dependently [arisen] things (pratītya-
340 On the name of the sutra, see KPed Preface, pp. V-VI; I refer to the sūtra as KP
here in the annotation. The KP citation presented by Candrakīrti is shorter than the
corresponding section of Staël-Holstein's Skt edition. Candrakīrti was either relying
on an earlier version of the KP or abbreviated the section. KPed § 102 (punctuation
reflects the ms' punctuation style; see Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya [henceforth VD]
2002: 36): cittam hi kāśyapa parigaveṣamāṇam na labhyate yan na labhyate tan
nopalabhyate¹ tan nātītam² nānāgatam na pratyutpannam • yan nātītaṁ³ nānāgatam
na pratyutpannamª tatradhvasamatikrāntam (read, following Weller 1965: 122, n. 1:
tat tryadhva°) yatryadhvasamatikrāntam (read, following Weller 1965: 122, n. 1: yat
tryadhvaº) • tan naivāsti neva nāsti • yan naivāsti na nāsti • tad ajātam yad ajātam
tasya nāsti svabhāvaḥ yasya nāsti svabhāvaḥ tasya nāsty utpāda³ • yasya nāsty
utpādaḥ tasya nāsti nirodhaḥ yasya nāsti nirodhaḥ tasya nāsti vigamaḥ avigamas
tasya rna gatir nāgatir na cyutir nopapattiḥ yatra na gatir nāgatir na cyutir
nopapattiḥ tatra na kecit samskārāḥ yatra na kecit samskārāḥ tad asamskṛtam
'yan nopalabhyate follows in PsP Skt and PsP Tib, and is also found in KPed Tib.
KPed Skt's tan nātītam would seem to expect it; it may have dropped from KP Skt as
the result of an eyeskip or, alternatively, after not having been attested in earlier
versions of the sūtra, it may have been added to Candrakīrti's version and the version
KPed Tib is based on because it was felt that a relative clause was needed. Weller's
translation of the Han version of the sūtra reveals that the Skt manuscript used for
the Chinese translation lacked as much as yan nopalabhyate tan nopalabhyate tan
nātītam nānāgatam na pratyutpannam yan nātītam nānāgatam na pratyutpannam tat
tradhvasamatikrāntam yat tryadhvasamatikrāntam (cf. Weller 1987a: 1215 and n. 2).
Weller (1965: 121f.) translates, without comment, the Tibetan equivalent of yan
nopalabhyate in his Sanskrit- and Tibetan-based translation; ²PsP Skt: naivātītam;
³PSP Skt: naivātītam; 4PsP Skt and PsP Tib skip from here to tasya nāsti svabhāvaḥ;
³read utpādaḥ; the loss of visarga is probably merely due to scribal negligence and
not because the non-inclusion of visarga is allowed in BHS (BHSG 8.22); see
Weller 1965: 122, n. 6; 7read: na.
PSP Tib corresponds exactly with the KPed Tib translation, but has been abbreviated
to conform to PsP Skt. The passage is translated in Weller 1965: 121f., Pāsādika
1979 (7): 30 and Chang 1983: 400. Further references at PSP₁ 45, n. 1. See also the
passage as commented on in Steinkellner 1992: 401f.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
177
341
bhāva), in being attached to things (dharma) as one whose attach-
ment [takes the form] "this is true" (idamsatyabhinivesin), both per-
forms acts and wanders in samsāra, [and]³4² because he is entrenched
in error he is not fit to attain nirvāṇa.
342
§77. [Question:] But do things (padārtha) even with a false own-
being become the cause of defilement (sanklesa) and purification
(vyavadāna)?
[Answer: Yes,] they do, like an illusory young woman (māyāyuvati)
[conjured up by a magician becomes a cause of defilement] for those
who are not aware of her [true] nature (svabhāva) and [like a person]
created by the Tathāgata (tathāgatanirmita) [becomes a cause of puri-
fication] for those who have gathered wholesome roots (kuśala-
mūla).343
For it is stated in the Dṛḍhādhyāśayaparipṛcchāsūtra,
For example, O son of good family, a certain [man], his mind
overcome by desire upon having seen a woman created by a
magician (māyākāra) during the presentation of the magician's
341 PSP Tib presents dngos po rnams rang bzhin yod par rtogs nas mngon par zhen pa
for pratītyabhāvānām svabhāvam abhinivisate; that is, the translators understood
pratītya as a verb and svabhāvam as its object. Although the compound pratītyabhāva
is, to the best of my knowledge, not found elsewhere in the PsP, the formulation
pratītya svabhāvam, especially in the present context, would be unusual. PsP Tib's
rtogs (for pratītya) does not inspire confidence in the translators' interpretation
because rtogs usually denotes a positively assessed understanding or insight and not
an error.
342
I do not accept ms Q's tu, because a contrast is not intended between the final part
of the sentence, i.e., between viparyāsāvasthitatvān na bhavyo nirvāṇam adhigantum,
and the preceding part; the only contrast intended is between the preceding KP
citation and this sentence.
343 The word kusala here probably refers to punya (karmic “merit”), or to spiritual
maturity, and possibly less to moral virtues, though these might be secondarily
presupposed. On the word kuśala, see Schmithausen 2013. The PsP Tib translators,
lacking the "square bracket" option, have chosen to expand the sentence for the sake
of clarity: de'i rang bzhin mngon par mi shes pa rnams kyi kun nas nyon mongs pa’i
rgyu yin la | de bzhin gshegs pa'i sprul pa ni dge ba'i rtsa ba bsags pa rnams kyi
rnam par byang ba’i rgyur 'gyur ba bzhin no ||.178
TRANSLATION
show, after leaving his seat on account of the anxiety and
shyness [he feels from being in such a state] in public, would exit
[the show]. Having left, he would reflect on that very woman as
repulsive (aśubha), [he] would reflect [on her] as impermanent
(anitya), as suffering/unpleasant (duḥkha), as empty (sunya),
[and] as without self (anātman).
344
345
344 PSP Tib attests six, not five, modes of reflection, adding mi gtsang ba (impure) as
the second mode, before anityataḥ and in place of manasikuryāt. *asucitaḥ is also not
found in the citation of the same sūtra passage in Candrakīrti's commentary on
MMK XXIII.14. The PsP Tib translators may be citing from a proto-Canonical
version of the sūtra, or they may have revised the pertinent section (in a version of
the sūtra similar to the one found in the Canon) by adding mi gtsang ba in order to
remove the syntactical oddness of mi sdug pa yid la byed as against bdag med par yid
la byed. See the following note.
345
The quotation is assigned by the PsP manuscripts to the Drḍhādhyāśaya-
paripṛcchāsūtra. De La Vallée Poussin reconstructs the title Lhag pa'i bsam pa bstan
pa'i mdo, attested in the Tibetan editions of the PSP and in the Golden Manuscript, as
Adhyāśayanirdeśasūtra, and perhaps because of this, adds a reference to the
Adhyāśayasamcodanasūtra (cf. PsP₁ 46, n. 1). I have not been able to locate a similar
citation in the Lhag pa'i bsam pa bskul ba (Derge no. 69) and thus assume that bstan
pa of the PSP Tib title is a carving error for brtan pa (= dṛḍha). A version of the cita-
tion is in fact found in the Tibetan Canon in the sūtra entitled ('Phags pa) lhag pa’i
bsam pa brtan pa'i le'u (Derge no. 224). The possibly reconstructed Sanskrit title is
given as Āryasthīrādhyāśayaparivarta (sic) at the beginning of the translated sūtra. A
very similar section is cited within a larger citation in Candrakīrti's commentary on
MMK XXIII.14 (the quotation appears at PSP₁ 463.10-13). There the sūtra from
which the citation is taken is also called the Dṛḍhādhyāśayaparipṛcchā (de La Vallée
Poussin corrects the title given at PsP₁ 462.15 at PsP₁ 605), a title given by the PsP
translators as 'Phag pa lhag pa'i bsam pa brtan pas zhus pa. This citation in the
commentary on MMK XXIII.14 (cf. PsP₁ 463.10-13) is nearly identical with the
Canonical version. The Canonical version of the quotation reads: rigs kyi bu ’di lta
ste dper na | mi¹ la la zhig gis sgyu ma mkhan gyi rol mo byung ba’i tshe | sgyu ma
mkhan gyis sprul pa'i bud med mthong na² 'dod chags kyi sems bskyed de | de³ dod
chags kyis sems dkris nas 'khor gyis 'jigs shing¹ bag tsha ste stan las langs nas song
ste de song nas bud med de nyid la mi sdug pa yid la byed cing5 | mi rtag pa dang |
sdug bsngal ba dang | stong pa dang | bdag med par yid la byed na | (D Taipei edition
fol. 330.3-5; D 165b). ¹PsP Tib chapter 1, in accord with chapter 1 Skt: omits mi; PsP
Tib chapter 23, in accord with chapter 23 Skt, includes mi. ²PsP Tib chapter 1 and 23:
nas. ³PSP Tib chapter 1, in accord with chapter 1 Skt: omits 'dod chags kyi sems
bskyed de de; PsP Tib chapter 23, in accord with chapter 23 Skt: includes 'dod
chags kyi sems bskyed de | de. 4PsP Tib chapter 23: nas; PsP Tib chapter 1: shing.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
179
And so on [in the sūtra].
And in the Vinaya, a mechanical woman (yantrayuvati) made by a
builder of [such] devices (yantrakāra), which was empty of a real
(sadbhūta) woman, appears to be real young woman, and became
the object of the lust and desire of the painter (citrakara).346
In the same way, things (bhāva) even with a false own-being become
the cause of the defilement³47 of the [spiritually] immature.
348
5PSP Tib chapter 1, against chapter 1 Skt: mi gtsang ba dang for yid la byed na; PsP
Tib chapter 23, in accord with chapter 23 Skt: yid la byed na.
346 The Vinaya reference is probably not a direct citation but rather Candrakīrti's
summary of a story in the Vinaya. The story can be found in the Mūlasarvāstivāda
Vinaya; for references, see Panglung 1981: 51. In the tale as recorded in the Gilgit
manuscript (Skt in Dutt 1947: 166f.), a painter (citrakarācārya) from Madhyadeśa
who had traveled to a Greek area (yavanaviṣaya) went to the place of a builder of
mechanical devices (yantrācārya) and was there served by a mechanical woman
(yantraputrikā). He wanted to enjoy himself with her but when she didn't respond he
grabbed her hand and pulled her, which caused her to fall into a heap of parts. When
he realized she was just a mechanical woman he felt extremely embarrassed. To get
back at the mechanic, he drew a picture on the wall of himself having committed
suicide out of shame by hanging – and then hid in order to watch the mechanic's
reaction. The mechanic was shocked when he saw the hanged “man." He reported the
suicide to the king, who then came to the mechanic's place. The king, however,
perceived that the hanged man was only a drawing on the wall, and as a result, the
mechanic was very embarrassed. The story also occurs at CŚȚ D 131b1ff.
347 PSP₁ Skt: samkleśavyavadānanibandhana "the cause of the defilement and
purification"; PsP Tib without an equivalent for vyavadāna. I reject the Sanskrit
manuscripts’ vyavadāna and consider PsP Tib to preserve the uncorrupted original
reading. The two examples just given, viz., the magically created woman and the
mechanical woman, are examples of unreal things that cause defilement; only the KP
quotation that Candrakīrti subsequently inserts provides an example for unreal things
that cause purification. The sentence following the KP quotation reads evam
mṛṣāsvabhāvābhyām tathāgatanirmitābhyām bhikṣubhyām pañcānām bhikṣuśatānām
vyavadānanibandhanam kṛtam, and thus refers exclusively to the KP quotation and
its presentation of unreal things that cause (only) purification. The word vyavadāna
of the sentence tathā mṛṣāsvabhāvā api bhāvā bālānām sankleśavyavadāna-
nibandhanam bhavanti here after the Vinaya reference, however, does not relate back
to material in either the Dṛḍhādhyāśayaparipṛcchāsūtra quotation or the Vinaya
reference just presented, for both depict situations in which unreal things cause only
defilement. Given that Candrakīrti, in his initial response to the opponent's question,
has announced the two, namely, a magical young woman and a being created by the180
§78. Likewise, in the Noble Ratnakūtasūtra,
TRANSLATION
349
Tathāgata, as examples of unreal things that respectively cause defilement and puri-
fication, the appearance of vyavadāna in the Sanskrit sentence after the Vinaya refer-
ence seems premature. It appears to be an insertion, probably added because a scribe
was struck by the similarity of the sentence tathā mṛṣāsvabhāvā api bhāvā bālānām
sanklesanibandhanam bhavanti to the opening question kim punar mṛṣāsvabhāvā api
padārthāḥ sankleśavyavadānanibandhanam bhavanti and concluded that the sentence
was the final answer to that question and that vyavadāna had dropped out. De La
Vallée Poussin, on the other hand, is of the opinion that when the magically created
woman of the first example is reflected upon as impermanent, suffering/unpleasant,
etc., she is additionally a cause of the purification of the man who took her to be real
and experienced desire for her (he states, “vyavadānaᵒ manque dans Tib., se rap-
porte en effet à l'example précédent” [PsP₁46, n. 5]); he therefore retains vyavadāna.
The magical woman might—although even this is a stretch-be considered as such if
the man, his mind finally calmed, learned from his experience with her and, applying
what he had gleaned from his experience with her to real women, similarly reflected
upon them as impermanent and empty, but I hardly think that the poor fellow's
desperate attempt to calm his mental and physiological reactions to her makes her a
cause of his purification. He simply forces himself to focus on lust-neutralizing
thoughts in regard to her; she does not, as the magical monks in the following long
KP quotation do, effect anyone's release from defilement.
348 Although bāla is often translated in similar contexts as "fools" (Seyfort Ruegg
[2002: 84] translates it in the present context as "the foolish"), the word is more often
used by Candrakīrti in the PsP, MABh, YṢV, CŚȚ and SSV to refer to the
counterpart to the āryas (Nobles). See, e.g., PsP₁ 371.8-9: tatra bālajanāpekṣayā
sarvam etat tathyam | āryajñānāpekṣayā tu sarvam etan mṛṣā. The bālas are those
who, inasmuch as their “mind's eye" is impaired by the “timira of ignorance," are
attached to things that actually lack own-being (niḥsvabhāva) because they are
convinced that these things have own-being, i.e., are real. They include those who
speak of a characteristic (lakṣaṇa) of things, such as heat as the characteristic of fire
(see PSP₁ 261.3-6). The word bāla sometimes appears conjoined with or glossed by
the compound pṛthagjana, also used as a synonym for anārya. pṛthagjana is used to
refer to ordinary persons, sometimes indeed to uninstructed ones, in general (see,
e.g., the Canonical citation at PsP₁ 137.5-8 and de La Vallée Poussin's n. 3) but in
the more specific soteriological context the word designates persons who have not
yet attained the path of seeing (darśanamārga), and thus includes Buddhist
practitioners as advanced as the prayogamārga (cf. YȘV 115, n. 39; 137, n. 97).
349 The corresponding KP passage is found at KPed § 141.3-149.5; VD 2002: 49-53.
The first sentence of this PsP chapter 1 citation bears some similarity with the San-
skrit as found at KPed § 138.3-5 (pamca ...) and KPed § 139.2-4. The citation appears
in a more extensive form at PsP₁ 336.3-339.2 (see Kragh 2003: 93ff.); this version
commences with text found at KPed § 139.2 and its initial section (not cited here in
the first chapter) corresponds quite closely with the Sanskrit for KPed § 139-141.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
181
Note that Kragh (2003: 93, n. 3) points out that the PSP chapter 17 citation appears to
be an interpolation: it is not included in PsP chapter 17 Tib, and in PsP chapter 17
Skt it is misplaced.
In comparing KPed Skt with PsP Skt, I have noted only the most important variants,
and have focussed primarily on the presence or absence of entire words and/or
phrases. A perusal of these variants as attested for the KP citation as found in PsP
chapter 1 vis-à-vis KPed Skt reveals that Candrakīrti relied on a more condensed and
somewhat different version of the text of the KP than that contained in the
manuscript used by Staël-Holstein for his edition of the KP, a manuscript written in
Brāhmī script and possibly copied in Khotan around the seventh-eighth centuries (see
VD 2002: vii; Staël-Holstein judged that the manuscript dates from around the ninth
to tenth centuries; see KPed Preface, p. VII); the manuscript is kept in St. Petersburg
and has been assigned the call number SI P/2. As can be noticed immediately upon
comparing the Sanskrit and Tibetan for the paragraphs in Staël-Holstein's edition,
KPed Tib frequently differs substantially from KPed Skt. PsP Skt, interestingly, on a
number of occasions agrees, against KPd Skt, with KPd Tib, thus suggesting that
Candrakīrti is citing from a version of the KP closer to the one from which the KP
Tib translation was made than to that found in ms SI P/2. Seemingly indicative of the
fact that the manuscript relied on for KPed Skt contains accretions is the reference to
500 nuns (pamcānām ca bhikṣunīśatānāṇ) at the end of KPed § 149 Skt, a reference
not appearing in KPed Tib or in PsP Skt or PsP Tib. The PsP Tib translators have, as
is their practice, inserted the pre-made KP Tib translation of the citation; thus PSP
Tib largely reproduces KPed Tib (the variants between PsP Tib and KPed Tib in the
passages cited are minimal and usually insignificant). PsP Tib—perhaps because the
translators inserted the sections of the long citation en bloc without meticulously
collating it against the PsP Skt citation includes a number of passages and sections
found in KPed Tib but not in PsP Skt.
Lamotte (1936: 288, n. 1) does not translate the KP citation in his PsP chapter 17
translation, referring there to the translation of the section in Stcherbatsky's
rendering of PsP chapter 1 (cf. Stcherbatsky 1927: 129-131). The sections in the
more extensive PsP chapter 17 citation which do not appear in Stcherbatsky’s chapter
1 translation are translated in an Appendix in May 1959 (299f.). The entire chapter
17 citation has more recently been translated in an Appendix in Kragh 2003: 266ff. A
partial translation of the citation as found in the first chapter of the PsP appears in
Lamotte 1987: 174, n. 66. The KP section is translated in Weller 1965: 145-152 and
in Pāsādika 1979 (9). Of comparative interest are Weller's translations from the Han
version of the KP (see Weller 1987a: 1229-1234) and from the Sung version of the
KP (see Weller 1987b: 1440-1447); see also Chang 1983: 407.182
TRANSLATION
Those five hundred monks,350 not understanding³51 the Exalted
One's teaching of the Doctrine (dharmadeśanā), not fathoming
[it], not being convinced [by it], rose from [their] seats and went
forth.352 Then the Exalted One created two [magical] monks on
the path on which these monks were going. Those five hundred
monks came near where those two monks were. Having come
near, they said to the two [magical monks], "Where are the
353
350 PSP Tib (cp. PsP §78, PsP₁ 47.1) and the second citation of the passage at PsP₁
336.3 additionally contain the epithet dhyānalābhīni / bsam gtan thob pa (“attainers
of the concentrations"), which is also found in KPed Skt and KPed Tib (see KPed §
139.2; VD 2002: 48); dhyānalābhī is also found earlier in KPed Skt and KPed Tib in a
similarly constructed sentence (see KPed § 138.4; VD 2002: 48). Ms P for PSP₁ 336.2
also presents dhyānalābhīni but does not attest it for our first chapter citation. The
first sentence for chapter 17's citation reads pañca ca bhikṣuśatāni dhyānalābhīny
utthāyāsanebhyaḥ prakrāntāni imāṁ gambhīrām dharmadeśanām anavabudhya-
mānāny anavataranty anavagāhamānāny anadhimucyamānāni | (cp. KPed § 138.3-5;
KPed § 139.2-4). Candrakīrti’s manuscript may not have contained the compound, or
he may be abbreviating.
35¹ The KP manuscript (see KPed § 139.3 Skt; VD 2002: 48) for the sentence after
which this first sentence in the PsP appears to be modelled reads avataramto, which
is corrected by Weller (1965: 145, n. 7) to nāvataramto on the basis of KP Tib mi
'jug; he corrects to nāvaº and not anavaº presumably because the KP manuscript
presents the immediately following negated participle in the form nāvaᵒ (masculine
plural forms appear in KP Skt because the monks are men; the grammatically correct
neuter plural forms in PsP Skt seem to have resulted from standardization). PSP₁
337.1: dharmadeśanām ana[va]budhyamānāny anavataranty anavagāhamāny
anadhimucyamānāni. KP Tib and PsP Tib place a shad after mi jug ste (KP Skt:
nāvataramto). The Sanskrit on which KP Tib is based may have read nāvataranti,
with avataranti being interpreted by the translators of KP Tib not as a neuter
nominative plural participle but as a third person plural finite verb. Alternatively, the
Sanskrit may have read nāvataranto (as KP Skt probably did), but the vertical stroke
making up part of the o of ᵒnto/mto akṣara was read as a daṇḍa and the superscript
part of the o interpreted as an i.
352 The KP citation that commences at PsP₁ 336.3 now includes, after its version
(similar to KPed § 139.2-4 Skt) of this first sentence, passages not found here in the
KP citation of PsP chapter 1 but found in KPed Skt; see PSP₁ 337.3-338.5 and cp.
KPed § 139.4 - § 141.3; see also Weller 1965: 145; May 1959: 299f.
35³ PsP Tib: dge slong Inga brgya po de dag dge slong de gnyis lam gang nas dong
ba'i lam der dong. Weller (1965: 146 and n. 13) translates the KPed Tib sentence:
"Dann kamen die fünfhundert Mönche dorthin, wo die zwei hervorgezauberten
Mönche auf dem Wege gingen,” noting “Das Verb steht im Tibetischen."PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
183
354
99355
Venerable Ones about to go?" The [magical monk] creations
said, "We are about to go to places in the forest. There we shall
abide in states of comfort consisting in the happiness of
meditation (dhyānasukhasparśavihāra). For we do not
understand, do not fathom, are not convinced of the Doctrine the
Exalted One teaches; we are afraid, are terrified [of it], we fall
into [a state of] dread." Then those five hundred monks said
this: "We too, O Venerable Ones, do not understand the Exalted
One's teaching of the Doctrine, do not fathom [it], are not
convinced [by it], are afraid, are terrified [of it], fall into dread.
Therefore we shall, at places in the forest, abide in states of
comfort consisting in the happiness of meditation." The
[magically] created [monks] said, "Then, Venerable Ones, we
shall confer together,³ we shall not dispute; for the duty of the
356
354 Weller (1965: 146, n. 18) notes that although KPed Skt presents sukham phāṣam
vihariṣyāmaḥ ("we shall dwell happily, comfortably") at this point and sukham
viharisyāmaḥ where the magical monks repeat their intent (KPed § 141.11 Skt), KPed
Tib attests bsam gtan gyi bde ba la reg par gnas pa rnams kyis gnas par bya, i.e., the
translation for dhyānasukhasparśavihārair vihariṣyāmaḥ for both instances. PsP Skt
and PSP Tib attest respectively dhyānasukhasparśavihārair vihariṣyāmaḥ and its
Tibetan equivalent for the first instance (PsP Skt does not include an equivalent
sentence for the one containing sukham vihariṣyāmaḥ, but PsP Tib does, and reads as
KPed Tib). PsP Skt further attests dhyānasukhasparśavihārair vihariṣyāmaḥ where
KPed § 142.3-4 Skt presents dhyānasukhavihārair vihariṣyāmaḥ (PsP Tib, based on
KP Tib, presents bsam gtan gyi bde ba la reg par gnas pa rnams kyis gnas par bya).
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 85) interprets sukha in the PSP Skt compound adjectivally ("we
shall abide in the abode of blissful contact in meditation") but does not explain with
what the "blissful contact" might be. The Tibetan and BHSD (s.v. sparśavihāratā)
speak against the adjectival interpretation. On vihāra, vihārati, see Maithrimurthi
1999: 17-19, especially nn. 14 and 15; Wezler 1990: 134ff. Cf. PsP₁ 47, n. 4.
355 PSP Tib adds: kho ba cag dgon pa'i gnas rnams su bsam gtan gyi bde ba la reg par
gnas pa rnams kyis gnas par bya'o. This sentence appears as the final sentence of
KPed § 141 Tib. KPed Skt reads: tāv āvām āraṇyāyataneṣu sukham vihariṣyāmaḥ.
356 Weller considers KPed Skt's typically BHS future form saṇgāyiṣyāma (PsP Skt
presents the classical form sangāsyāmaḥ) as properly reflected in KPed Tib's yag dag
par bgro bar bya (PsP Tib in all four Canonical editions and the Golden Manuscript
is presented as yag dag par 'gro bar bya, probably the result of an auditory error),
which he translates in a note "wir wollen auf rechte Weise erörtern, betrachten" (cf.
Weller 1965: 147, n. 2); cf. Jäschke s.v. bgro ba: "to argue, discuss, deliberate,
consider." Weller translates samgāyiṣyāma in his main text as "Wir wollen uns184
TRANSLATION
357
•
ascetic (śramaṇadharma) consists principally in [being] without
strife (avivādaparama)357 358 For the sake of abandoning what
have the Venerable Ones engaged in practice?" They said, "We
have engaged in practice for the abandoning of desire (rāga),
hatred (dvesa) and disorientation (moha). "359 The created
zusammen beraten." He notes that Edgerton differs in his interpretation of the verb:
BHSD entry for samgāyati: “lit.: ‘sings in union' = is concordant, avoids quarreling,
opp. of vivadati" (Edgerton's single reference is to this KP passage). Pāsādika (1979
[9]: 26) translates “let us be united." See, in support of Weller's main text translation,
PW s.v. sam√ gā: “gemeinschaftlich besingen" which, applied to the KP situation
makes sense as "talk/discuss together."
KPed § 142.5: avivāda paramo hi śramaṇadharmaḥ for avivādaparamo hi śra-
maṇadharmaḥ, but correctly presented in VD 2002: 50. Weller (1965: 147) trans-
lates, "Ist doch die Streitlosigkeit das höchste Gesetz für die Religiosen." KPed Tib
reads rtsod pa med pa lhur len pa ni dge sbyong gi chos, and PsP Tib presents the
synonymous rtsod pa med pa lhur byed pa ni ... (both lhur len (pa) and lhur byed (pa)
are often seen representing parama as the final member of a compound). If Jäschke's
rendering of lhur len pa as "to apply oneself" is correct, it may be that the translators
interpreted the Sanskrit slightly differently, i.e., as "[to be] one who applies oneself
to [being] without strife is the duty of ascetics." In line with this, Weller (1965: 147,
n. 3) translates KPed Tib's rtsod pa med pa lhur len pa ni dge sbyong gi chos as "Sich
der Streitlosigkeit zu befleissigen ist das Gesetz der Religiosen." De La Vallée
Poussin comments on avivāda at PsP₁ 47, n. 5. Noteworthy are Vetter's (2001: 72f.
and n. 44) comments on the meaning of "one dwelling without strife" in this KP
passage (*araṇavihārin; his focus is Lokakṣema's Chinese translation). Cp. the refer-
ence to samaṇadhamma at AN III.371.
358 PSP Tib includes the continuing text found in KPed § 142 Tib (KPed Skt contains
similar, more extensive text) but not found in PsP Skt. It also reproduces the text,
with minor variants, as it is found in KPed § 143 Tib (KPed Skt differs from KPed Tib).
359 The two sentences kasyāyuṣmantaḥ prahāṇāya pratipannāḥ | tāny avocan
rāgadveṣamohānāṁ prahāṇāya vayam pratipannāḥ do not appear in KPed Skt, KPed
Tib, or PSP Tib. There also does not appear to be enough space in the corresponding
damaged part of the PSP chapter 17 citation in ms P for the two sentences. This
damaged part in ms P's chapter 17, however, provides exactly enough space for the
KPed
Skt (not found in our PsP chapter 1 Skt) which follows the compound śramaṇa-
dharmaḥ: yad iha-m-āyuṣmanta ity ucyate parinirvāṇam iti | katamaḥ sa dharmo yaḥ
pari(nirvā)syati (KPed § 142.5-7; see VD 2002: 50; ms P's chapter 17 text in fact
begins again with nirvāsyati). PsP Tib (chapter 1), not attesting the two sentences
found in our PsP Skt, accords with KPed Tib in including the rest of KPed § 142 Tib.
PSP Tib carries on with KPed § 143 Tib, which lacks an equivalent for KPed § 143.1-4
Skt. PsP Skt ends for KPed § 142 with śramaṇadharmaḥ (KPed § 142.5) and picks up
again at KPed § 143.6. KPed § 143.4-5 Skt: (kim) puna sākṣīkṛyāyā parinirvāsyatīti | tePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
185
[monks] said, "But do desire, hatred and disorientation [actually]
exist for the Venerable Ones so that you might destroy them?”
They replied, "Neither internally, nor externally, nor [some-
where] in between the two are they perceived;360 nor do they,
unless one imagines them (aparikalpita), arise." The [two]
created [monks] said, "Therefore, O Venerable Ones, do not
construct, do not conceptualize. And when you, O Venerable
Ones, do not construct, do not conceptualize, you will not feel
desirous, you will not become free from desire.361 And it is said
that he who is not desirous, is not desireless, is at peace (śānta).
Morality (śīla), O Venerable Ones, does not wander [in samsāra]
(na samsarati), does not enter full nirvāṇa (na parinirvāti);
concentration (samadhi), insight (prajñā), liberation (vimukti),
and the knowledge and the vision of liberation (vimuktijñāna-
darśana),362 O Venerable Ones, do not wander in samsāra, do not
āhuḥ | rāgakṣayāya dveṣakṣayāya mohakṣayāya āyuṣmanta parinirvāṇam (see VD
2002: 50). KPed Tib and PsP Tib present gang zad pas yongs su mya ngan las 'da' | de
dag gis smras pa 'dod chags zad zhe sdang zad gti mug zad pas yongs su mya ngan
las 'da'o.
360 A parallel expression occurs in the Pratyutpannabuddhasammukhāvasthita-
samādhisūtra (see Harrison 1990: 42), and in the Vimalakīrtinirdeśasūtra (nāpattir
adhyātmam na bahirdhā nobhayam antareṇopalabhyate; see Lamotte 1987: 174).
KPed Tib (and PSP Tib following it) translates nobhayam antareṇa as gnyi ga med pa
la yang (PsP Tib par for pa la), that is, as “also not in the absence of the two."
Harrison (1990: 42, n. 24) considers a desire for intelligibility as the reason for this
translation choice, stating: “Certainly ‘neither inside nor outside' is more readily
understood than 'between inside and outside."" PsP Tib for the following
Vajramaṇḍadhāraṇī quotation likewise translates sa ca paridāho nādhyātmaṁ na
bahirdhā nobhayam antareṇa sthitaḥ as de yang nang na ’ang mi gnas phyi rol na
’ang mi gnas gnyi ga med par yang mi gnas.
361 Lamotte (1987: 174, n. 66) translates na ramkṣyatha na viramkṣyatha as "vous
n'éprouverez ni amour ni haîne” but I think that the author of the KP probably
wishes to convey the idea that when conceptualizing has ceased, there is no desire,
and when there is no desire, there can be no relinquishing of it. The non-existence of
desire implies that there is nothing there, i.e., no desirous feeling or emotion, that
could be given up. Cf. Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 86; Pāsādika 1979 (9): 27.
362 As de La Vallée Poussin notes, morality, concentration, insight, liberation, and the
knowledge and vision of liberation are the five lokottaraskandhas. For references,
see Lamotte 1987: 139, n. 30; PsP₁ 48, n. 1; 292, n. 4. Candrakīrti refers to this
grouping of skandhas in his commentary on MMK XXII.1 where he states that if the186
TRANSLATION
enter full nirvāṇa. And nirvāṇa, O Venerable Ones, is indicated
by these dharmas, but these dharmas are empty (śūnya), isolated
by nature (prakṛtivivikta). Give up, O Venerable Ones, this
notion (sañjñā), namely, ‘full nirvāṇa.' Neither form a notion in
regard to a notion nor see through a notion by way of a notion;
because for the one who sees through a notion by way of a notion
this becomes nothing but bondage to notions.363 O Venerable
Ones, accomplish the absorption of the cessation of [all] notions
and feelings (sañjñāvedayitanirodhasamāpatti).364 We assert that
there is nothing left to be done by the monk who has
accomplished the absorption of the cessation of [all] notions and
feelings."
Then the minds (citta) of those five hundred monks, not clinging
(anupādāya), became liberated from the influxes/impurities
(aśrava). Those [monks] of liberated mind went near to where
the Exalted One was, [and] come near, [and] having paid homage
with their heads to his feet, sat to one side. Then the Venerable
Subhūti said this to those monks: "Where did the Venerable
Ones go? Or from where did you come?" They replied, "Not for
going somewhere, not for coming from somewhere, O Reverend
Subhūti, did the Exalted One teach the Doctrine." [Subhūti] said,
"Who, then, is the teacher of the Venerable Ones?" They said,
"The one who has not arisen, [who] will not enter full nirvāṇa."
[Subhūti] said, “How (i.e., expecting what) have you listened to
the Doctrine?" They said, "Not for bondage, not for liberation."
[Subhūti] said, "By whom have you been trained?" They said,
"[By the one] who has no body, no mind." [Subhūti] said, "How
Tathāgata really existed, he would exist having either the own-being of the five
skandhas [bodily] matter, feeling, ideation, impulses, and consciousness, the own-
being of the five listed here, or one different from these. He goes on to say that only
the first set of skandhas is considered in the chapter, since the second is not
comprehensive, included as it is in the first set (avyāpakatvād eṣām pūrvakair
antarbhāvitatvāt; see PsP₁ 432.14-433.3)
363 pari√ jñā "to know thoroughly," thus by extension "to see through," often implies
that that which is seen through is also cleared away, eliminated.
364 On sañjñāvedayitanirodhasamāpatti, see Schmithausen 1981: 214ff.; Griffiths
1991 (Index s.v. Attainment of Cessation).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
187
have you practised?” They said, “Not for abandoning ignorance,
not for generating knowledge (vidyā)."365 [Subhūti] said, "Whose
auditors (śrāvaka) are you?" They said, "[We are the auditors of
the one] who has not attained [anything], who has not awakened
to [anything]."⁹366 [Subhūti] said, “Who are your fellow disciples
(sabrahmacārin)?” They said, “[Those] who do not range in the
triple world (tridhātu)." [Subhūti] said, "After how long a time
will the Venerable Ones enter into full nirvāṇa?" They said,
"When the [magical monks] created by the Tathāgata will enter
into full nirvāṇa.” [Subhūti] said, "Have you done what is to be
done?" They said, "Owing to seeing through the notions of 'I'
and 'mine' (ahankāramamakāra)." [Subhūti] said, "Are your
defilements (klesa) exhausted?" They said, "Owing to the
complete exhaustion of all phenomena (dharma)." [Subhūti] said,
"Has Māra been overpowered by you?” They said, "Owing to the
non-perception of Māra [represented by] the [five] constituent
elements (skandha).”³67 [Subhūti] said, "Has the teacher been
honoured by you?" They said, "Not with the body, not with
speech, not with the mind." [Subhūti] said, “Has the ground
(bhūmi) of those worthy of gifts (dakṣiṇīya) been purified by
365 The PSP Skt text here agrees with KPd Tib, against KPed Skt; see Weller's (1965:
149, n. 13) comments on KPed Skt for this passage. PsP Tib includes the final
sentences of KPed § 146.
366
KPed Skt reads: yasya na prāpto nā[bhi]sambuddhaḥ (see VD 2002: 52). Cf. CPD
(s.v. abhi -2.) on the prefix abhi lending a transitive sense to intransitives: "as
preverb to verbs and their derivatives expresses: movement towards or against or
over; intensivity; or gives a transitive meaning to intransitive verbs." Weller (1965:
149) translates, “[Dessen,] von dem keiner [als Schüler] erlangt wird und der nicht
die völlige Erleuchtung gewann." PsP Tib and KPed Tib: gang gis thob pa med cing
mngon par rdzogs par sangs rgyas pa med pa'i'o.
367 The four Māras found in later literature are skandhamāra, kleśamāra, mṛtyumāra,
and devaputramāra (noted at PsP₁ 49, n. 4); on the Māras, see Dayal 1978: 306-317;
Lamotte 1966: 339-346; Lamotte 1987: 204, n. 121; AKBh II.124, n. 5 (ref.).
Candrakīrti refers to the four Māras at PsP₁ 442.3 and 451.7; cp. YṢ kārikā 36ab and
Candrakīrti's commentary where he describes the Māra referred to in the kārikā as
'phags pa'i shes rab kyi dbang po'i srog gi bar chad byed pa (YȘVed 76.8-15; see
also YȘV 264f., nn. 511-513).
tr188
TRANSLATION
you?"368 They said, "From not taking, from not receiving.”
[Subhūti] said, "Have you crossed over samsāra?" They said,
"On account of non-annihilation (anuccheda), on account of non-
eternity (aśāśvata).”³6⁹ [Subhūti] said, “Have you attained the
ground of those worthy of gifts?" They said, "From the release
of all grasping (grāha).” [Subhūti] said, "Where do the Vener-
able Ones intend to go?" They said, "Where the [monks] created
by the Tathāgata intend to go." Right then as the Venerable
Subhūti was questioning [them] and as those monks were
responding, the minds of eight hundred monks in that assembly,
not clinging, were liberated from the influxes/impurities, and of
thirty-two thousand beings the Dharma-eye (dharmacakṣu) in
regard to the teachings was purified (viśuddha), [to the point of
being] dustless (virajas), delivered of [all] dross (vigatamala).370
368 KP Skt presents sthitā yuṣmākam dākṣiṇeyabhūmau : (the two final dots represent
punctuation; see VD 2002: 52. KPed mistakenly presents bhūmauḥ), as compared to
PsP's visodhita yuṣmābhir dakṣiṇīyabhūmiḥ. Weller (1965: 151, n. 9) reconstructs
śuddhā yuṣmābhir dākṣiṇeyabhūmiḥ from KPd Tib's khyed khyis sbyin pa’i gnas kyi
sa sbyangs sam (PsP Tib: khyod kyis yon gnas kyi sa sbyangs sam), noting that the
Djin and Sung Chinese translations also support the reading suddhā, not sthitā.
369
I do not know why Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 88) translates anucchedato 'śāśvatataḥ
as "Neither from non-destruction nor from non-eternity”. “Neither” is not supported
by PSP Skt or PSP Tib.
37⁰ On the Dharma-eye, see ASBh 78.6: yad uktam virajo vigatamalam dharmeșu
dharmacakṣur utpadyata iti tad darśanamārgam adhikṛtyoktam, tatprathamataḥ
satyeṣv āryaprajñācakṣuḥsvabhāvatvāt | tatra dharmakṣāntibhir virajaḥ, tābhiḥ kleśa-
rajaḥprahāṇāt | dharmajñānair vigatamalam, teṣām prahāṇatadāvaraṇamalāśra-
yotpādāt¹ | punar anayor eva kṣāntijñānāvasthayor yathākramam parijñayā prahāṇe-
na ca mārgasya viśuddhatām adhikṛtya virajo vigatamalam veditavyam ||; ¹Tatia (n. 2)
notes that the Tibetan and Chinese appear to have the better reading *tadāvaraṇa-
malaprahāṇāśrayotpādāt. One might instead suggest prahīṇatadāvaraṇaᵒ (Tib [P
704b]: de dag ni de’i sgrib pa’i dri ma spangs pa’i gnas su skyes pa’i phyir ro). The
Canonical Pāli texts tend to present the construction virajam vītamalam dhamma-
cakkhum udapādi. Both PTSD and BHSD refer to the definition dhammesu vā
cakkhum dhammamayam vā cakkhum for dhammacakkhu of DN-aṭṭha I.237. Walshe
(1987: 547, n. 140) notes that the opening of the Dharma-eye is “a term for ‘entering
the stream' and thus being set irrevocably on the path.” He continues, “As RD [=
Rhys Davids] points out, it is superior to the divine eye (dibba-cakkhu ...) which is a
superior kind of clairvoyance, and below the wisdom-eye (pañña-cakkhu), which is
the wisdom of the Arahant." Bodhi (2000: 1404, n. 40), in reference to the formulaicPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
189
In this way, a cause of purification was effected for the five hundred
monks by way of the [two] monks created by the Tathāgata, [both of
whom] had a false own-being.
371
§79. And it is stated in the Noble Vajramaṇḍadhāraṇī,
"Just as, O Mañjuśrī, in dependence on a stick (kāṇḍa), in
dependence on a churning stick (mathanī),³7² and ³73 in depend-
ence on a man's manual exertion (hastavyāyama), smoke
appears, [and] fire comes forth but that burning heat (santāpa)
of the fire is not located in the stick, not located in the churning
stick, not located in the man's manual exertion exactly so, O
virajam vītamalam dhammacakkhum udapādi appearing at SN IV.47, states, “The
arising of the vision of the Dhamma (dhammacakkhu) means the attainment of one of
the three lower stages of awakening, usually stream-entry.” On the five kinds of eyes
(especially the heavenly eye), see Lamotte 1987: 168f., nn. 57 and 58.
371 De La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 50, n. 3) states that a fragment of this same citation of
the Vajramaṇḍadhāraṇī (VMD) is cited at PsP₁ 462.4-5. The sūtra, which is not
preserved in Sanskrit, is found in P vol. 32 (no. 807; 300b3-312a4) and D vol. 56 (no.
139; 278a1-289b4) under the name 'Phags pa rdo rje'i snying po'i gzungs (shes bya
ba theg pa chen po'i mdo); its Sanskrit name is given as Āryavajramaṇḍanāma-
dhāraṇī(mahāyānasūtra). PsP Tib frequently differs from the Canonical translation.
This, together with the fact that readings in PsP Tib also diverge from PsP Skt, point
to the Tibetan having been quoted from a proto-Canonical translation of the VMD. I
note only the major variants between PsP Skt and PsP Tib. The VMD Tib text up to
the "etymological" explanation of moha is found at P fol. 304b8-305a3. The text for
the section discussing the hells is found at P fol. 306b6-308a4.
372
I suspect that mathanī refers to the churning stick and not to the act of rotating the
first-mentioned stick (kāṇḍa), for otherwise the "manual exertion” (hastavyāyāmam)
would be redundant. Cp. R.L. Turner, A Comparative Dictionary of Indo-Aryan
Languages, London: Oxford U. Press, 1966, p. 561 s.v. mathana, where mahanī is
translated as “churning stick.” kāṇḍa would appear, then, to be the counterpart to the
churning stick. I do not know exactly how it was used together with the churning
stick. PsP Tib translates mathanī with gtsub stan (“a basis for the [fire]churning
stick"). TCD explains gtsub shing gtsub stan with me 'byin pa’i shing yas mas gnyis.
The translators may have had a slightly different set of tools in mind than the author
of the sutra. Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 89), in translating mathanī as “a rubbing surface,"
appears to be following the Tibetan.
373 The ca appears only in ms Q, and I accept it for my edition. P's (and the paper
mss') reading without ca is, however, also possible if one assumes that the sticks are
already lying there and the physical activity of the hand is the catalyst.190
TRANSLATION
Manjuśrī, does the burn (paridāha) of desire (rāga), the burn of
hatred (dveșa), the burn of disorientation (moha) arise for a
person (puruṣapudgala)374 who is disoriented by [subjective]
error in regard to what is unreal. And that burn is not inside, not
outside, not [somewhere] in between the two. But, Mañjuśrī,
why is 'disorientation' (moha) called 'disorientation'? Because
disorientation is completely deprived (atyantamukta) of [the true
nature of] all phenomena (dharma), O Mañjuśrī; therefore it is
called 'disorientation. 375 Similarly, all phenomena have [a
source like] the source of the hells (narakamukha), O Mañjuśrī;
this is a formulaic phrase (dhāraṇīpada)."376 [Mañjuśrī] said,
374 *LT's author comments on puruṣapudgala as follows: puruṣa ity ātmāpi syād ataḥ
pudgala ity āha; "puruṣa' could also mean the Self/soul (ātman); therefore he says
[i.e., adds,] 'pudgala" (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 123, 140 [fol. 2b2]). The compound is
composed of quasi-synonyms, and has the sense "a human person." Cp. PTSD s.v.
purisapuggalo: “a man, a human character."
375 The sūtra presumes an etymological connection between the substantive moha (in
classical Sanskrit derived from √muh) and the past passive participle mukta (in clas-
sical Sanskrit derived from √muc). Specifically, moha is interpreted as derived from
√muc, possibly because the word explanation originated within a middle-Indic lin-
guistic environment or because the author of the sūtra had a middle-Indic develop-
ment in mind. One might hypothesize that the substantive *moa-from *moca or
*moka (derived from √muc) was written as moha, with h serving as a glide, as in
certain other Prākrit words; on the h glide, cf. von Hinüber 2001: 211. *LT's author
glosses sarvadharmaiḥ mukto with sarvadharmmaiḥ śunyatvādibhir mukto bahiṣkṛtaḥ
(ms: bahiḥkṛtaḥ) “[disorientation is] deprived of [that is,] separate from all dharmas,
that is, [separate from] emptiness and so forth" (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 123, 141 [fol.
2b2]). Candrakīrti explains moha (from √muh) elsewhere as readily understood in
both a bhāvasādhana and a karaṇasādhana sense: mohanam mohaḥ sammohaḥ
padārthasvarūpāparijñānam muhyate vānena cittam iti mohaḥ (PsP₁ 457.5; cf. May
1959: 186). The general meaning of moha is nicely exemplified in the compound
digmoha "confusion with respect to the directions." Included is the idea of a confu-
sion that is disturbing to the person experiencing it. The compound does not neces-
sarily imply, but may take into account the idea that one has mixed up the directions,
i.e., that in taking north to be south one has become misoriented. The primary idea is
one of disorientation. PsP Tib presents 'jam dpal gti mug ni chos thams cad rab tu
grol ba ste for atyantamukto hi mañjuśrīḥ sarvadharmair mohas.
376 Some texts suggest that a dhāraṇīpada is a formulaic phrase containing the
essence of the/a Buddhist teaching in condensed form. Cf. BhoBhū 272.12ff.; see
also Hartmann 1985. I understand the "source/origin" (mukha) of phenomena intend-
ed by the sūtra to be conceptuality (vikalpa), i.e., ideational error (sañjñāviparyāsa). IPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
191
"How, O Exalted One, is this a formulaic phrase?” [The Exalted
One] said, "The hells, O Mañjuśrī, fabricated by [subjective]
error in regard to what is unreal by [spiritually] immature
ordinary persons, have come about through [these persons'] own
conceptuality (vikalpa)." [Mañjuśrī] said, “Where, O Exalted
One, are the hells gathered together?" The Exalted One said,
"The hells are gathered together in space, O Mañjuśrī. Then what
do you think, O Mañjuśrī, have the hells come about by virtue of
[these persons'] own conceptuality or have they come about by
[their] own nature?" [Mañjuśrī] said, "Only by virtue of [their]
own conceptuality, O Exalted One, do all [spiritually] immature
ordinary persons know the hells and the animal [realm] and the
concur with *LT's author in taking narakamukhāḥ as an upamā bahuvrīhi compound.
*LT's author, however, offers an interpretation of the sentence that slightly differs
from my undertanding of its meaning. He begins his comments on the formulaic
phrase (dhāraṇī) by glossing mukha of narakamukhāḥ of the citation with āśrayaḥ,
(even though the *LȚ manuscript could be interpreted as reading mukhyatā here and
Yonezawa [2004: 123, 141] accepts this reading, the continuing explication makes
clear that mukham is being glossed; one should perhaps read mukham āśrayaḥ). He
explains that in the present context that which is the source, i.e., the basis, is [empty]
space (tac cātrākāśam). After dissolving narakamukhāḥ of the sūtra citation as, as
stated, an upamā bahuvrīhi (narakamukham iva mukham yeṣām sarvadharm{m}ā-
ṇām), *LT’s author concludes his explanation by stating that the sūtra's sentence thus
means that just as the hells have [empty] space as their basis, so do all phenomena
(yathā narakā ākāśāśrayās tathā sarvadharmā apīty arthaḥ). He adds that a dhāraṇī-
pada is called such because it contains the teaching of all the Buddhas (alternatively,
"the entire teaching of the Buddhas”): sarvabuddhadharm{m}adhāraṇād dhāraṇī-
padam (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 123, 141 [fol. 2b2]).
=
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 89) understands the sentence tathā narakamukhā mañjuśrīḥ
sarvadharmā idam dhāraṇīpadam differently, and translates, taking the Tibetan into
consideration: "Thus, Mañjuśrī, all dharmas being entries for (the denizens of) hells
(narakamukha = sems can dmyal ba’i sgo), this is a Formulaic Phrase (dhāraṇīpada :
gzuns gi tshig)." It is true that sems can dmyal ba can have the meaning “hell-being,”
but given the context and the fact that naraka occurs a number of times in the citation
and is consistently translated throughout as sems can dmyal ba, it is better understood
as referring to the hells. It is also difficult to know what the sūtra author might have
intended if he really meant that dharmas are "entries for the denizens of hells."
Stcherbatsky's (1927: 131) free translation “The axiom of this Dhāraṇī is that all
elements are like the hells" indicates that he understood the sentence as expressing an
equivalence of the hells and all other phenomena.192
TRANSLATION
world of Yama.377 And they, on account of [their] super-
imposition of the unreal, feel painful feeling, and experience
[imagined] pain in all three bad destinies (apāya)."
"And just as, O Exalted One, I see the hells [as unreal], so [do I
see] hellish pain (duḥkha) [as unreal].378 For example, O Exalted
One, a certain man, asleep, in a dream, experiences 379 himself as
gone to hell. There, he would experience himself as cast into a
boiling, glowing iron pot of many fathoms.380 Inside it, he would
feel harsh, sharp, acute, agonizing pain; in it, he would ex-
perience mental anguish, he would be afraid, would be terrified,
would fall into [a state of] dread. Then, upon awakening,
381
377 *LT's author glosses yamaloka with pretāḥ (hungry ghosts) (cf. Yonezawa 2004:
124, 141 [fol. 2b3]).
378 Even though PsP Tib and VMD Tib support ms Q's reading nāham, ms P’s (and
B, J and L's) cāham is preferable on stylistic grounds: Were the negation itself to be
emphasized, na would stand at the beginning of the sentence (right after yathā [= Q]),
but should the stress be on narakān and nārakam duḥkham, one would expect it to be
placed before paśyāmi. The fact that it does not stand before paśyāmi in Q leads one
to suspect that Q's na is either a scribal mistake or the result of deliberate change. As
stated earlier, PSP Tib has been copied in from VMD Tib.
379 sam√ jñā covers a broad field of concepts, some of which can be challenging to
find English equivalents for. The two aspects prominent in the present section are
conscious experience (sam√jñā in its sense of apperception) and imagining, and the
emphasis on one or the other varies throughout. I translate sañjānīte as "experi-
ences" above because the aware experience of being in hell stands in the foreground
at this point, and it is clear that this experience occurs in a dream; one could alterna-
tively consider "imaginarily experiences."
380 PSP Skt reads anekapauruṣāyām lohakumbhyām (“into a iron pot of many
fathoms") but PSP Tib reads lcags kyi bum pa skyes bu du ma dang ldan pa (“[into] a
iron pot with many people in it"). VMD Tib has been corrected to read lcags kyi
bum pa
'dom du ma mchis pa’i nang na, which corresponds with PsP Skt. See the
following note. Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 90), taking the Tibetan into consideration,
translates, "There he might conceive of himself as precipitated into a boiling and
fiery iron cauldron large enough for many men."
381 The VMD citation, which was copied into PsP Tib, presents de de nas sad par
gyur zhing rlom pa dang bcas pas for sa tatra prativibuddhaḥ samānaḥ, with samāna
thus interpreted in the sense of “prideful/arrogant.” samānaḥ is, however, here not
intended in its classical meaning. It rather represents a Middle Indian medial present
participle from √as ("being") that survived in Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit; in the
present context it can be translated as “upon” (thus “he, upon awakening”) (cf.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
193
would cry out, would lament, would wail, 'Oh, the pain! Oh, the
pain!' His friends, acquaintances and relatives would then
inquire, 'What is this pain of yours from?' He would speak to
those friends, acquaintances and relatives thus, 'I have
experienced the pain of the hells!' He would [then] scold, would
rebuke them [saying], 'Really!³82 I experience the pain of the
hells, and you [go on to] ask me, 'What is this pain of yours
from?!' Then those friends, acquaintances and relatives would
speak to that man in the [following] way, 'Ah, [good] fellow,
don't be afraid, don't be afraid, for you were sleeping; you did
not depart from this house for somewhere [else].' Once again his
memory would surface [and he would realize:] 'I was asleep!
This which I assumed [to be happening] is false (vitatha), unreal
(abhūta).' [And] once again he recovers [his] contentedness
(saumanasya)."
"Just as, O Exalted One, that man, through the superimposition
of the unreal (asat), asleep, in a dream, would experience himself
as gone to hell, in exactly the same way, O Exalted One, do all
[spiritually] immature ordinary persons, ensnared by unreal
desire, construct the appearance (nimitta) ³8³ of a woman. Having
383
BHSD s.v. samāna). The erroneous rlom pa dang bcas pa in the translation of the
VMD relied upon by the PsP Tib translators does not appear in the version of the
sūtra found in the Canon or in the sTog, Gondhla and Phug brag collections. This and
other errors and inconsistencies have led me to hypothesize that the PsP translators
relied on an early and unrevised version of the VMD. For more details, see
MacDonald 2015.
382
I understand nāma in its sense of indicating anger or censure (cf. Apte s.v. nāma,
meaning 7.)
383 The word nimitta in the context of the citation refers to the entity woman in her
entirety, and not, as it does in many other contexts, to a quality or a characteristic
feature of an entity, such as the breasts of a woman (e.g., as in passages in which
monks are advised not to grasp, i.e., give attention to, the female nimitta [= breasts]
because if the nimitta are not grasped, there will be no formation of samjñā in regard
to them and thus no resulting unwholesome mental, verbal or physical action on the
part of the monk). PsP Tib supports this interpretation of nimitta as the entire entity
with bud med la mtshan mar rtog par bgyid. As Schmithausen has noted, the
expression nimitta means first of all “characteristic” (“Merkmal”; he calls attention
to the series of quasi-synonyms yair ākārair yair lingair yair nimittaiḥ recorded in
the Aṣṭādaśasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā, ed. E. Conze, Rome 1962: 149.3), but, similar194
TRANSLATION
constructed the appearance of a woman, they experience
themselves playing amorously with those [women]. The [spirit-
ually] immature ordinary person comes to think thus, ‘I am a
man, this is a woman, this woman is mine.' His mind, inasmuch
as that mind is possessed by yearning and desire (chandarāga),
goes in search of enjoyment (bhoga). For that reason he pro-
vokes arguments, quarrels and disputes. Because his [mental]
faculty is corrupted, enmity (vaira) arises in him. He, on account
of that ideational error (sañjñāviparyāsa), upon ³85 dying imagines
himself as feeling agonizing pain in the hells for many thousands
of aeons (kalpa)."
99386
384
to the way in which dharmas are held to be independent characteristics or states,
without there being a substance bearing them, the nimittas too are often considered to
be independent, and not merely the attributes of their bases, the attribute-bearers (see
his further comments in Schmithausen 1969: 120, n. 67). Erb (1990: 146) comments,
"nimitta wird aber nicht nur für rein nominelle Erscheinungen wie Zahlen, Zeitstufen
oder für Eigenschaften wie śubha, strī, puruṣa usw. verwendet, sondern bezeichnet
auch durchaus konkretere Gegenstände: RĀ Vers 91-92; MMK XXV.24ab:
sarvopalambhopaśamaḥ; Paraphrase dazu in Pras. S. 538.5: iha hi sarveṣām
prapañcānām nimittānāṁ ya upaśamo ...". See, similarly, YȘV on YS 6cd (srid pa
yongs su shes pa ni || mya ngan 'das shes brjod pa yin ||), where it is stated in regard
to the thorough knowledge of existence, i.e., the knowledge that [occurs] in the mode
of thorough non-knowledge of existence's being without arising, that “de nyid
mtshan ma thams cad rab tu zhi ba’i ngo bo yin pas” (“just that has the nature of the
calming of all appearances"; cp. Scherrer-Schaub's translation "C'est elle qui
constitue la forme (ngo ba) de l'apaisement de toutes les déterminations (mtshan ma
: nimitta) [qui caractérisent les objects de la connaissance empirique]." See YŞVed
37.23-25; YSV 147. *LT's author interprets strīnimitta to mean the fact of being
endowed with the characteristics of a woman, such as the mouth/face: strīnimittam
mukhādivaisiṣṭyam (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 124, 141 [fol. 2b3]).
=
tr
384 De La Vallée Poussin takes note of a scholastic definition of chanda and rāga
recorded in the AKVy: aprāpteṣu viṣayeṣu prārthanā chandaḥ prāpteṣu rāgaḥ (PsP₁
52, n. 3). I believe that the sutra cited above intends the two as quasi-synonyms.
385 As earlier in the same VMD citation, samāna is translated as rlom pa dang bcas
pa. See n. 381.
386
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 91) appears to assume that the desirous man just described
is the same man who dreamed he went to hell: "And, with this conceptual
misapprehension (samjñāviparyāsa), he conceives of himself as, being dead, feeling a
sensation of pain in hells for many thousands of aeons. For example, Lord, his
friends, relations and kinsmen address this man as follows: "Do not fear, good fellow
do not fear! You were asleep, you have gone nowhere outside this house." The twoPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
195
"Just as, O Exalted One, the friends, acquaintances and relatives
of that man [who dreamed he went to hell] speak thus, 'Ah,
[good] fellow, do not be afraid, do not be afraid, for you were
sleeping; you did not depart from this house for somewhere
[else],' in just the same way, O Exalted One, do the Buddhas, the
Exalted Ones, teach the Doctrine to beings who are mistaken due
to an error of the mind (cittaviparyāsaviparyasta) thus: 'There is
no woman (strī) here, there is no man (puruṣa), no being (sattva),
no living being (jīva), no individual (puruṣa), no person
(pudgala).387 All these phenomena (dharma) are untrue (vitatha),
all these phenomena are inexistent (asat). All these phenomena
are fabricated (viṭhapita); like a magical illusion are all these
phenomena, like a dream are all these phenomena, like magically
created [things] are all these phenomena, like the moon
[reflected] in water are all these phenomena,' and so on in detail.
They, having heard this the Tathāgata's teaching of the Doctrine,
see all phenomena as [things] for which desire (rāga) has faded,
they see all phenomena as [things] in regard to which hatred
(doşa) has faded, they see all phenomena as [things] with regard
to which disorientation (moha) has faded, as without own-being,
without obstruction (anāvaraṇa). They die with the mind situated
men are not identical: the first only dreamed he went to hell, but the second actually
did end up in hell. Because the latter believes in the reality of things, he does feel
agonizing pain in hell; it is stated that he “imagines" himself as feeling the agonizing
pain only because all things, from heaven and heavenly pleasure to hell and hellish
pain are imagined by spiritually immature beings. The introduction to the paragraph
makes clear that the experience of ordinary persons is being compared to a dream.
387 Given that in the present passage the references to puruṣa and strī suggest that a
negation of conventional concepts is primary, I translate the second occurrence of
puruṣa in the sentence as “individual” and not as "soul," and also pudgala as
"person,” not as “[enduring, holistic] person." I also assume that jīva is merely
intended as equivalent to sattva and therefore in the present context means "living
being," as opposed to "life principle” and thus "soul." However, the Śrāvakas
listening to or reading the sūtra's statements would probably also make an
association with the traditional negation of metaphysical entities like "soul" and
"[enduring, holistic] person."196
TRANSLATION
388
in space.
After death they enter the sphere of nirvāṇa without
remainder. [It is] in this way, [i.e., arisen from conceptuality and
thus like a dream, etc.,] that I, O Exalted One, see the hells."
§80. And it is stated in the Noble Upāliparipṛcchā,389
The peril of hell I have shown - many thousands of beings have
become upset.
390
391
But there exists in this world no being³⁹¹ who, having died, goes
to a horrific bad destiny.
388 *LT glosses ākāśasthitena with anālambanena (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 124, 141 [fol.
2b3]).
389 Candrakīrti cites Upāliparipṛcchā 67-70. The same verses are cited again at PsP₁
191.2-9 and PSP₁ 234.10 (de La Vallée Poussin does not reproduce the Sanskrit for
the final citation and instead refers back to the previous two). Python (1973: XI)
writes, "Les abondantes citations de l'Upāliº prouvent son autorité aussi bien pour le
Vinaya mahāyāniste-dont il paraît être le texte de base-que pour la doctrine méta-
physique du Mādhyamika: il est cité par Candrakīrti presque autant que le Samādhi-
rājasūtra.” Sanskrit (based on PsP₁) and Tibetan in Python 1973: 59f., translation
128f. PsP Tib's citation has been copied in from the premade Upāliparipṛcchā Tib
translation. The PsP's citations of the verses are translated in Stcherbatsky 1927:
133; May 1959: 156f.; Schayer 1931: 22f., Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 92f. The sūtra forms
part of the larger Ratnakūṭa collection. The Sanskrit for the text exists only in
fragments and citations which, according to Python (1973: 1), cover approximately a
third of the work. The PSP provides the only known Sanskrit for verses 67-70; thus
again the importance of the readings attested in our manuscripts.
3⁹0 I translate darśita as “shown" (and not as “taught,” as the Tibetan and other
translators have) because it is possible that the author of the sūtra wanted to convey
the idea that a terrifying vision of hell had been created by the Buddha (cf. also
Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 92). Stcherbatsky (1927: 133) takes darśita as a non-causative
form and translates, "I have seen the many terrors of the hell, by which thousands of
creatures are tormented"; similarly Schayer (1931: 22): “Ich habe manche
Höllenschrecken geschaut, von denen Tausende von Wesen gequält werden." The
first line of PsP Tib and Upāliparipṛcchā Tib reads sems dmyal 'jigs pa nga yis bstan
byas te. May (1959: 156): “J'ai enseigné la terreur de l'enfer: bien des milliers
d'êtres en sont bouleversés." Python (1973: 128): “Bien qu’à mon enseignement sur
les terreurs des enfers [d]es milliers et des milliers d'êtres sont accablés." Lang
(2001: 239): "I have explained the fear of hell. A hundred beings have trembled, not
[just] one.” Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 92): “Hellish (nairayika = sems dmyal) fear was
shown by me, and thousands of sentient beings fell into shock." I understand bhaya,
which means "fear" but also what one is afraid of, i.e., “danger," as intended here in
the latter sense (“danger, risk, hazard”; cf. Apte s.v. bhayam #3).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
197
Nor do the torturers 3⁹2 [in hell], by whom swords, lances and
daggers are used, exist.393
Yet by the power of [mental] construction one sees there, in a
bad existence, those daggers plunge down on the body.
394
39¹ PsP Tib, Upāliparipṛcchā Tib: gang dag shi 'phos ngan song drag 'gro ba’i || 'gro
ba de dag nam yang yod ma yin || for na ca vidyati kaściha (to be understood as
kaśc'iha) satvo yo cyutu gacchati ghoram apāyam ||. The translators of Upālipari-
pṛcchā Tib may have read karhi ta sattvā instead of kaściha satvo, or possibly karhi
sa satvo (their dag indicating a collective understanding of the singular).
392 Python (cf. 1973: 128, n. 6) emends kāraku kāraṇa to kāraṇakāraka on the basis
of the Upaliparipṛcchā Tib (gnod pa byed pa) and Chinese, noting that the final à of
kāraṇā has been dropped metri causa. (On kāraṇā “torture,” "torment," cf. BHSD
s.v. kāraṇā, and Gustav Roth, Bhikṣuṇī-Vinaya. Manual of Discipline for Buddhist
Nuns, Tibetan Sanskrit Works Series XII. Patna: K.P. Jayaswal Research Institute,
1970, p. 130 § 154). The reading kārakakāraṇa as found in ms Q and in all three
instances of the citation in ms P, as well as in D, J and L (ms B reads kāraka-
kāraṇam), may have entered the PsP ms tradition due to a scribe's unintentional
transposition of kāraka and kāraṇa or because someone understood kāraṇa in the
sense of "cause" and not as kāraṇā (“torture”) and felt kāraka should stand in first
position (but should we assume that the person responsible for the change also
located and "corrected" the other two instances later in the PsP?). May (1959: 156)
translates following PsP₁: “Il n'y a ni agent ni cause qui produise épées, javelots,
couteaux." Stcherbatsky (1927: 133) attempts to deal with the problematic text by
translating, “There are there no swords, no arrows and no spears, by which torture is
inflicted" (Schayer [1931: 23] translates similarly). Lang (2001: 239), also reading
kārakakāraṇa, translates: “There are no instruments [of torture] and no agents who
brandish knives, spears, and swords.” Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 92): “There are no
slaughterers [?] by whom swords, javelins and knives are brandished." See the
following note.
393 The pāda reads yehi krtā asitomaraśastrāḥ. I tend to doubt that the author intended
to lay stress on the idea that the torturers made their weapons and thus assume that
asi, etc., plus √kṛ should be understood along the lines of astrāṇi √kṛ (MW s.v. √kr)
"to practice the use of weapons." See also, e.g., bhesajjam karoti (cf. CPD s.v. karo-
ti), which may, in addition to "to prepare medicine,” mean “to treat with medicine.”
The Tibetan presents gang dag ral gri mda’ chen mtshon 'byin pa’'i ||; 'byin pa can
also mean "to pull out (a sword).”
394 PsP Tib, Upāliparipṛcchā Tib: rtog pa’i dbang gis ngan song de dag na || lus la
'bab mthong de na mtshon cha med ||. Stcherbatsky (1927: 133) and Schayer (1931:
23) translate following the Tibetan: “... there are no real weapons"; "... diese Waffen
existieren nicht." PsP₁ presents patanti apāyita śāśtrāḥ, which Python corrects to
apāyi ta (= apāye te). Python (1973: 128, n. 8) considers Upāliparipṛcchā Tib to be
translating apāyitāḥ “ceux qui sont entrés dan les enfers" and that de La Vallée198
TRANSLATION
396
Adorned ³95 with multi-coloured, delightful flowers, lovely
golden palaces shine [in the heavenly realms],
[Yet] for these, too, there is not some agent here; and these too
have been set up by the power of [mental] construction.
By the force of [mental] construction the world is conceptual-
ized; through grasping at ideation a [spiritually] immature
[person] is conceptualized;397
Poussin was influenced by the Tibetan; de La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 53, n. 6), how-
ever, retranslates PsP Tib for the verse (very literally) as ye asi-tomara-sastra-
kṣepaṇa-apaghāta-kārakāḥ, [te] na santi; kalpavaśena durgatiṣu tāsu kāye patanti
[sastrāṇi] paśyati; tatra śastrāṇi na santi. I doubt that the difference between the
Tibetan and Sanskrit was so extreme; perhaps the Tibetan is a result of apāyi ta
sastrāḥ having been read as apāyi na śastrāḥ.
395 All the manuscripts attest samjñita, I presume a wrong reading for sajjita, given
that jj of sajjita could be easily confused with at least in old Nepalese and forms of
old Bengalī script-graphically similar jñ. sajjita must be based on √sajj (cf. MW
s.v. sajjita: fastened or attached to; equipped, prepared; ornamented), whereas Tib's
kha bye seems to be based on a form like phullita. PsP Tib, Upāliparipṛcchā Tib: sna
tshogs yid dga' me tog kha bye zhing || gser gyi khang mchog 'bar ba yid ’ong ba ||.
Stcherbatsky (1927: 133): (And in the heavens) delightful golden palaces decorated
with beautiful variegated flowers appear before us." Schayer (1931: 23): “[Und im
Himmel] erscheinen schöne, goldene Paläste, geschmückt mit lieblichen, bunten
Blumen." May (1959: 156): “[Dans les paradis,] de beaux châteaux dorés étincellent,
où s'épanouissent d'exquises fleurs multicolores." Python (1973: 129): “Des fleurs
de toutes couleurs, plaisantes, épanouies, (Avec) des palais d'or attrayants qui
resplendissent: Pour ces choses ... ." Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 92): “Lovely golden
pavilions shine, with bright and charming flowers blooming."
396 In accord with de La Vallée Poussin, Python and Upaliparipṛcchā Tib, I have
emended the manuscripts' śreṣṭhāḥ to puspāḥ (the confusion/change is paleo-
graphically explainable), although śreṣṭhāḥ is not metrically impossible if it is read as
s,esthāḥ (cp. g,aho, i.e., gaho) The compound is difficult to explain, especially
because even with puṣpāḥ one expects puspasajjitāḥ, not °sajjitapuṣpāḥ; was the
order reversed for the sake of the metre?
397 One is tempted to translate vikalpitu bāla as “the [spiritually] immature [person]
conceptualizes," but this would demand understanding vikalpitu (= vikalpita) in an
active sense, and thus differently than in pāda a, where it has its usual passive sense
(Seyfort Ruegg [2002: 92f.] translates both vikalpitus actively). PsP Tib (=
Upaliparipṛcchā Tib), however, has rtog pa’i dbang gis jig rten rnam brtags te || 'du
shes 'dzin pas byis pa rnam par phye ||. The Chinese (T 12.325: 42a5) translates
“Clinging to sañjñā makes immature persons wander around [in samsāra?].”" May
(1959: 156f.): "par la force de l'imagination, le vulgaire hypostasie; par croyance enPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
199
But that grasping is non-grasping, unreal;398 for conceptuality is
similar to a magical illusion and a mirage.
Thus in this way it is established that things with an unreal own-
being, which are fabricated by [one's] own [subjective] error, become
causes of defilement for the [spiritually] immature in samsāra.
And the way in which things with a false own-being are causes of
defilement and purification should be determined in detail from the
Madhyamakāvatāra.399
(son) aperception, le simple différencie." Cp. Lang (2001: 239): "A fool is
conceptualized through grasping at ideas.”
398 All other translators of the verse have understood the intent of so ca gaho agaho
asabhūto to be that grasping and non-grasping are unreal, e.g., Python (1973: 129):
"Mais appréhension et non-appréhension sont sans existence propre"; Seyfort Ruegg
(2002: 93): "unarisen (asadbhūto = 'byun min te) is this grasping (graha) and non-
grasping (agraha).” The Upāliparipṛcchā Tib translator understood the statement in
the same way: 'dzin dang 'dzin med de yang 'byung min te ||. It would seem, however,
that the sūtra author only intends to convey the message that the realms of existence
and all grasping at them is unreal; whether non-grasping as well is unreal is in the
present context irrelevant.
399 Candrakīrti may have in mind, among other passages, the section in the MABh
which commences with an opponent asserting that when attachment (*abhiniveśa) to
real existence is being cut off, the fearful person is inevitably attached to the truth of
worldly practice (vyavahāra), because he thinks that the cause of defilement and
purification necessarily arises with some substantial own-being (ci ste yang de ltar
dngos po la mngon par zhen pa’i bdog pa thams cad kun nas gcod pa na bred sha
thon pa tha snyad kyi bden pa la mngon par zhen pa 'di gang zhig kun nas nyon
mongs pa dang rnam par byang ba’i rgyur gyur pa rdzas kyi bdag nyid 'ga' zhig skye
bar 'gyur bar bya dgos so zhes smra na | (MABhed 122.7-11). De La Vallée Poussin,
who has not understood that bred sha thon pa refers to a person, translates: “Mais,
dira-t-on, cette adhésion (abhiniveśa) à la vérité pratique, qui expulse crainte et désir
quand on abandonne tous ses biens, et qui est adhésion aus choses, qui, en
général, est cause de souillure (samkleśa) et de purification (vyavadāna), il est
nécessaire qu'elle naisse avec quelque réalité” (MABh 1910: 315). Candrakīrti
responds (MA VI.36) that arising from self or other on the level of worldly practice
is not tenable for the same reasons it is not tenable with regard to the ultimate. After
explaining that all things arise from causal complexes and are thus, like mirages, etc.,
which arise from causal complexes, empty of own-being, he focusses the discussion
on karmic causality, with the aim of demonstrating that even without acceptance of
the reality of karmic acts and their fruits and especially without unnecessary
constructs like the ālayavijñāna of the Yogācāra school, avipraṇāśa (rejected200
TRANSLATION
§81. At this point [the opponent] says, “If things do not arise from
self, from other, from both or without a cause, then why did the
Exalted One say, 'With ignorance as condition (avidyāpratyaya), the
impulses (samskāra) [come to be]'?"4⁰0
Reply: This is the surface [level] (samvṛti), not true reality (tattva).
§82. [Question:] Is it, [in the case] of the surface level,401 not neces-
sary to point out how it is established [i.e., in terms of svataḥ, etc.]?
[Answer:] The surface [level's] establishment (siddhi) through mere
conditionality (idampratyayatāmātra) is accepted [by us]; not,
however, [an establishment] through acceptance of the four-fold
position (pakṣacatuṣṭaya), because [that] would entail [our admitting]
doctrine [which posits that things are] endowed with own-being
(sasvabhāvavāda), and because that [acceptance of any of the four
positions] is inappropriate. For when mere conditionality is accepted,
owing to the mutual reliance (anyonyāpekṣa) of cause (hetu) and
effect (phala), there is no establishment implying own-being (svābhā-
vikī siddhiḥ).ª Thus, a doctrine [whereby things are posited as]
endowed with own-being is not [maintained by us].
402
ultimately but accepted on the surface level by Nāgārjuna; cf. MMK XVII.13-20),
and prāpti of the Sarvāstivādins-karmic retribution is possible. In the course of the
discussion, Candrakīrti cites the Bhavasamkrāntisūtra's example of a great king who
dreams of being with a beautiful woman and who later, awake, remembering her,
becomes obsessed with her and tortured by his loss. In the same way, the sutra con-
tinues, do ordinary persons, having seen [unreal] objects, become attached to them,
develop desire for them, and confer energy (*abhisam(s)√kr) to actions arising from
desire, hatred and disorientation by way of their body, voice and mind (cf. MABhed
127.17-128.13).
400 Cf. §71 and n. 300.
401 Or: "Is it, [in the case] of [dependent-arising on] the surface level, not necessary
99
402 Candrakīrti clarifies that on the surface level things "exist" only through their
being conditioned by something else, exemplifying this by way of the mutual
reliance (anyonyapekṣā) of cause and effect. Mutual reliance is in fact the second of
the three meanings ascribed by Candrakīrti to the word samvṛti (PsP₁ 492.11):
parasparasambhavanam vā samvṛtir anyonyasamāśrayeṇety arthaḥ “Or, samvṛti is
reciprocal coming into being; [this] means [coming into being] by way of mutualPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
201
Just on account of that [Nāgārjuna] has stated,
Logicians (tārkika) maintain that suffering (duḥkha) is created by
self (svayankṛtam), created by other, created by both, [created]
relation/contingence." On the possible logic behind statements in Nāgārjuna's MMK
which demand the reciprocal existence of, e.g., cause and effect, and yet reject the
real existence of such mutually reliant entities, see Oetke 1990. According to Oetke
(ibid., 103), who proposes a "condition-merger-hypothesis", real existence is shown
by Nāgārjuna to be impossible when atemporal logical conditions, such as those of
cause and effect where the concept of cause logically requires the concept of effect,
and vice-versa (thus mutual dependence)—are assimilated to, applied to, temporal
"real" conditions, since the "real"-in the case of cause and effect also "causal"-
conditions can be demonstrated to not admit of the temporally prior existence of any
one of the (pair, triad, etc., of) conditions under consideration. MMK VIII.12 is
included in the verses cited after the present paragraph because its presentation of the
pair action (karma) and agent (kāraka) confirms Candrakīrti's claim that mere
mutual reliance is the only mode of establishment that can be acknowledged on the
surface level. As Candrakīrti points out in his introduction to this same eighth-
chapter kārikā, the surface level attains, when one acquiesces to worldly subjective
error, its “establishment” exclusively through the acceptance of the mere condi-
tionality of surface level things, which are similar to water in a mirage (PsP₁ 189.1-3:
... laukikam viparyāsam abhyupetya sāmvṛtānām padārthānāṇ marīcikājalakalpānām
idampratyayatāmātrābhyupagamenaiva). For Candrakīrti's explanation of the
meaning of samvṛti and also of samvṛtisatya, see additionally MA VI.28 and its
commentary. In the context of responding to an opponent who argues that the
Madhyamika, in rejecting arising from self or other, actually asserts only one level of
truth, and not two, Candrakīrti replies that although this lack of reality of things on
the surface level does indeed imply that there is in fact only one level of truth, the
surface truth, unanalyzed and in conformity with the world, is accepted because it is
the means for entering into ultimate truth (cf. MABhed 119.14-120.4: ci ste de ltar mi
'dod na ni bden pa gnyis ci ste brjod de | bden pa gcig kho nar 'gyur ro || ... 'di la
bshad par bya ste | 'di bden mod kyi don dam par na bden pa gnyis yod pa ma yin te |
dge slong dag bden pa dam pa 'di ni gcig ste | ... de’i phyir kun rdzob kyi bden pa
gang yin pa de ni don dam pa'i bden pa la 'jug par bya ba'i thabs yin pa’i phyir |
bdag dang gzhan dag las skye ba ma dpyad par 'jig rten pa'i lugs kyis khas len par
byed pa yin no ||). Shortly thereafter Candrakīrti states that one should merely accept
that which the world thinks, namely, “When this is present, this comes to be"
(MABhed 120.15-17: ’jig rten pas yongs su mthong ba ’di yod na ’di 'byung ngo zhes
bya ba 'di tsam zhig gzhan la rag las pa’i ’jug pa’i sgo nas khas blang bar bya ste |;
de La Vallée Poussin tentatively reconstructs gzhan la rag las pa’i ’jug pa’i sgo nas
as parādhīnavṛttidvāreṇa and translates "subordonnant ainsi sa manière de faire au
prochain" [MABh 1910: 314]). On idampratyayatā, see n. 85. For comments on the
argumentation in MMK VIII, see Bhattacharya 1981.202
TRANSLATION
without cause. You, however, have [merely] stated that it
originates in dependence (pratītyaja).“
403
Also here [in the Madhyamakaśāstra he] will say,
403 Candrakīrti cites Lokātītastava 21: svayankṛtam parakṛtam dvābhyām kṛtam ahe-
tukam | tārkikair isyate duḥkham tvayā tūktam pratītyajam ||. Sanskrit, Tibetan and
translation in Lindtner 1982b: 134f. Nāgārjuna devotes MMK XII to a refutation of
suffering created by self, other, both, and without a cause (suffering is explicated by
Candrakīrti as being the five appropriated skandhas). Candrakīrti again cites
Lokātītastava 21 in his commentary on the final kārikā of MMK XII, again in the
context of a response to a questioner who has asked what kind of establishment
suffering and external things might have if they are not possible in any of the four
ways. He answers: tasmāt svabhāvato na santi duḥkhādīnīty avasīyate | atha
viparyāsamātralabdhātmasattākāyā duḥkhādisamvṛteḥ pratītyasamutpādavyavasthā
mṛgyate tadā karmakārakaparīkṣāprakaraṇavihitavidhinā yathoditapakṣacatuṣṭaya-
tiraskāreṇedampratyayatāmātrārthapratītyasamutpādasiddhyā siddhir abhyupeyā ||.
"... Therefore, it is ascertained that suffering, etc., do not exist by own-being. But if
a determination of the dependent-arising of surface [level things] such as suffering-
the existence of which is arrived at through mere [subjective] error—be sought, then
one ought to maintain an establishment according to the manner prescribed in the
chapter on the examination of act and agent, [i.e.,] without the stated four-fold posi-
tion, that is, by way of the establishment of dependent-arising in the meaning of mere
conditionality" (PsP₁ 234.3-6; the Lokātītastava verse is cited immediately after this
statement).
Discussions that consider the way in which suffering arises occur already in the
Canon. Cp. SN II.19-21, where the Buddha explains to Kassapa, who has asked if
suffering is self-made, made by other, made by both, or fortuitously comes into
being, that if one thinks the person who acts is the same as the person who experi-
ences the result of actions [in the next life], one maintains self-created suffering and
thereby holds an eternalistic view. If one thinks the actor and experiencer are differ-
ent persons, one holds the view of annihilation. The Tathāgata, he states, without
veering toward either extreme, teaches the Dhamma by way of the middle: "With
ignorance as condition, the impulses [come to be]; with the impulses as condition,
consciousness comes to be such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering” (...
Ete te Kassapa ubho ante anupagamma majjhena Tathāgato dhammam deseti ||
Avijjāpaccayā sankhārā ...). See also the following sutta's (SN II.22f.) similar ex-
planation in regard to pain and pleasure (sukhadukkha) and SN II.112f. for the
dismissal of aging and death—down to consciousness and name and form—as arisen
from self, other, both or fortuitously. It is stated at SN II.33ff. that "some ascetics and
brahmins, proponents of kamma” (samaṇabrāhmaṇa kammavādā) are holders of one
or another of the four views in regard to suffering. These Canonical discussions of
course presume the real existence of the respective links of dependent-arising.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
203
In dependence on action (karma), an agent (kāraka) [exists], and
dependent on that agent
Action comes to be. We do not see another cause of establish-
ment (siddhikāraṇa).ª
404
Just this much has been stated by the Exalted One, too: "As concerns
this, this is the conventional explanation of things (dharmasanketa),
404 Candrakīrti cites MMK VIII.12: pratītya kārakaḥ karma tam pratītya ca kārakam |
karma pravartate nānyat paśyāmaḥ siddhikāraṇam ||. Candrakīrti cites the same
kārikā in his MABh in the comparable context of responding to an opponent who has
asked how the surface-level arising of consciousness, etc., and a sprout, etc., from
respectively ignorance and the impulses, and a seed, is determinable if arising from
self, other, both and without a cause is negated from the point of view of both the
surface and ultimate levels (cf. MABhed 226.1-4; MABh 1911: 276). There
Candrakīrti states that one bases oneself on just the principle "'di la brten nas 'di
'byung ba zhig" (*idam pratītyedam bhavati) (MABhed 226.14-15); for when one
explains dependent-arising which consists in mere conditionality, not only are the
concepts of arising without a cause, etc., impossible, but also other concepts such as
eternity and annihilation, permanence and impermanence, etc., are completely
impossible (de ltar rkyen nyid 'di pa tsam gyi rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba bshad pa
na | rgyu med par skye ba la sogs pa'i rtog pa 'di dag mi srid pa 'ba' zhig tu ma zad
kyi | rtag pa dang chad pa dang rtag pa dang mi rtag pa dang dngos po dang dngos
po med pa gnyis la sogs pa rtog pa gzhan dag kyang mi srid pa nyid do || [MABhed
227.14-18; MABh 1911: 277f.]).
Candrakīrti's commentary on the following kārikā (MMK XII.9) makes clear that the
mutual reliance deemed by him to allow for a so-called establishment of the surface
level is to be related to mutually reliant pairs; it in no way implies dependence on a
"causal nexus" or even the interdependence of all things, an idea that is bereft of any
textual support but still propagated by a number of scholars and applied to the
ultimate level(!): PsP₁ 190.5-8: karmakārakopādeyopādātṛvyatiriktā ye nye bhāvā
janyajanakagantṛgamanadraṣṭavyadarśanalakṣyalakṣaṇotpādyotpādakāḥ
tathāvayavāvayaviguṇaguṇipramāṇaprameyādayo niravaśeṣā bhāvās teṣām kartṛ-
karmavicāreņa svabhāvato 'stitvam pratișidhya parasparāpekṣikīm eva siddhim
prājño nirmumukṣur jātijarāmaraṇādibandhanebhyo mokṣāya vibhāvayet || “The
intelligent person who wants release [from samsāra], having refuted by way of the
analysis of act and agent-the existence by own-being of other things, i.e., [things]
other than act and agent, appropriated and appropriator, [things, that is, such as] the
originated and the originator, goer and [act of] going, what is seen and sight, what is
characterized and characteristic, that produced and producer [and] similarly, part and
whole, quality and qualificand, means of valid cognition and what is cognized, and so
forth, [in short,] all things, should regard, for the sake of release from the bonds of
birth, old age and death, their establishment to be solely one of mutual reliance."204
TRANSLATION
namely, 'When this is present, that comes to be, from the arising of
this, that arises,' namely, 'with ignorance as condition, the impulses
[come to be], with the impulses as condition, consciousness [comes to
be]'."405
§83. At this point, certain [Naiyāyika opponents] critique:40
.406
405 The same citation occurs at MABhed 226.16-18: ji skad du bcom ldan 'das kyis de
la chos kyi brda ni 'di yin te | 'di lta ste | 'di yod na 'di 'byung | 'di skyes pas 'di skye
ste gang 'di ma rig pa’i rkyen gyis 'du byed rnams zhes bya ba la sogs pa gsungs
so ||. De La Vallée Poussin identifies the MABh citation as an extract from the
Paramārthaśūnyatāsūtra, noting that a version of the extract occurs in the BCAP and
that the beginning of the version of the citation as found in the BCAP is cited in the
Sūtrālamkāra and that the sūtra is identified there by name (cf. MABh 1911: 277, n.
2). Mahāyānasūtrālaṁkāra (ed. Sylvain Lévi, Paris 1907: 158.20-22): paramārtha-
śūnyatāyām asti karmāsti vipākaḥ kārakas tu nopalabhyate ya imāmś ca skandhān
nikṣipati anyāmś ca skandhān pratisamdadhāti | anyatra dharmasamketād iti desitam
|. BCAP 474.15-18: uktam caitad bhagavatā | iti hi bhikṣavo 'sti karma | asti phalam
kārakas tu nopalabhyate ya imān skandhān vijahāti | anyāṇś ca skandhān upādatte
anyatra dharmasamketāt | atrāyaṇ dharmasamketo yad asmin sati idam bhavaty
asyotpādād idam utpadyata iti |.
406 Candrakīrti does not name the opponents. *LȚ's author neither identifies the op-
ponents nor comments on any of the words or phrases in the citation. Most scholars
who have translated or studied this section of the PsP assign the critique to Dignāga
and/or representatives of the Buddhist logical-epistemological school; some others
consider the opponent to be Bhāviveka.
The ascription to Dignāga of the view, expressed at three different points in the
objection, that all things exist, is unacceptable. Dignāga would have been fully aware
that the Madhyamaka negation of things is made from the point of view of the
ultimate, and he would not have engaged with his fellow Mahāyānists in a debate
focussed on the final nature of things in which he would utter pronouncements
incongruous with his own Yogācāra stance. Dignāga shares with the Mādhyamikas
the view that worldly things exist only on the surface level and are actually unreal,
differing from them primarily in maintaining that ultimately nothing but self-
cognizing consciousness exists. In encounters where the topic of conversation was
the ultimate status of things, the declaration sarvabhāvāḥ santi would have been as
sharply denounced by him as it was by the Madhyamikas.
Although a passage with the exact wording of the objection could not be located, I
have been able to find similar, but less elaborated, versions of the objection's
arguments at two places in Uddyotakara's NV (NV on NS IV.1.40 and NV on NS
IV.2.27) and in one passage in Pakṣilasvāmin Vātsyāyana's NBh (NBh on NS
IV.2.30). Uddyotakara, for example, in his commentary on NS IV.2.27, critiques the
opponent's assertion that all things are not possible by stating: sarvabhāvānupapattir
iti ca bruvāṇaḥ pramāṇam paryanuyojyaḥ | yadi pramāṇam bravīti, vyāhatam bhava-PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
205
Does this ascertainment (niścaya), namely, “things have not
arisen" (anutpannā bhāvā iti)407 stem from a means of valid
cognition (pramāṇaja) or does it not stem from a means of valid
cognition (apramāṇaja)?4⁰8 Among those [two alternatives], if it
is maintained that it stems from a means of valid cognition, then
this needs to be disclosed [by you]: How many means of valid
cognition are there? What characteristics (lakṣaṇa) do they have?
What are their objects (viṣaya)? Have they arisen from self?
[Have they arisen] from other, from both, or [have they arisen]
ti | atha na bravīty artho 'sya na sidhyati pramāṇābhāvāt | athāprāmāṇikī siddhiḥ
sarvabhāvānām upapattir ity asya kasmān na siddhiḥ | (cf. NV 487.17-488.1). For the
NV on NS IV.1.40, the NBh passage and further details, see below Appendix XI. See
also MacDonald 2011.
It is interesting but not surprising that Candrakīrti takes time to deflect the Naiyāyika
critique given the school's long history of attacking the Mādhyamikas; the fact that
Uddyotakara's lifetime may have intersected with his own might also have played a
role (Steinkellner [1961: 153] has suggested 550-610 for Uddyotakara's lifetime).
Given that Candrakīrti does on occasion slightly alter the wording of passages he is
citing from the śāstras of others, it is possible that he relied on the arguments in
Vātsyāyana's and/or Uddyotakara's commentaries and revamped them to suit his
own agenda. On the other hand, it is possible that Candrakīrti had at his disposal
another Nyāya text that contained this more extensive, fleshed-out version of the
well-known and frequently utilized critique. If this is the case, the PSP has preserved
for us a lengthy citation from a lost Nyāya treatise.
The transition in the PSP from the discussion with the Naiyāyika to the longer one
with Dignāga is in fact quite clear, or at least would have been for the philosophers
making up Candrakīrti's audience. His explanation of the purpose of the MMK, a
response to the final critique in the above objection, neatly winds up the discussion,
and his new opponent's reference to the "treatise" (śāstra) in which worldly dealing
with means of cognition and that which is cognized is topical unambiguously
announces that the confrontation with the Yogācāra proponent Dignāga and his
influential work, the PS, has begun.
407 The Naiyāyika opponent may be referring with anutpannā bhāvāḥ iti to the
declaration of a specific Mādhyamika, or may consider it to represent the Madhya-
maka view in general. It is is possible that the reference is specifically to MMK I.1's
na utpannā vidyate bhāvāḥ.
408 Tib takes only pramāṇa as the scope for the negation and thus translates
apramāṇaja as tshad ma ma yin pa las skyes pa. The next occurrence of apramāṇaja
has also been translated this way.206
TRANSLATION
without a cause?40⁹ But if [you maintain that this ascertainment]
does not stem from a means of valid cognition, [we will respond
that] that [ascertainment derived in such a way] is not tenable,
because the apprehension of an object of valid cognition (pra-
meyādhigama) relies on a means of valid cognition (pramā-
ṇādhīna); for a thing / state of affairs that has not [yet] been
apprehended cannot be apprehended without [one or another of]
the means of valid cognition. Thus, when there is no apprehen-
sion of a thing / state of affairs on account of the non-existence
of means of valid cognition, how [can] that [sort of ascertain-
ment be] for you a reasonable ascertainment? Therefore, this
[claim that] things have not arisen is not tenable. Or, [alterna-
tively,] on the basis of exactly that [same non-reliance on a
means of valid cognition] owing to which the ascertainment that
things have not arisen may occur for you, [there may occur]
also/equally for me [the ascertainment] that all things exist.4¹
410
409
It goes
without saying that the Mādhyamika will reject this first alternative which
demands acceptance of the arising of means of valid cognition from one of the four
alternatives. Cf. VV 51: naiva svataḥ prasiddhir na parasparataḥ parapramāṇair vā |
na bhavati na ca prameyair na cāpy akasmāt pramāṇānām || (VV ed 72).
4¹⁰ Cf. n. 406 and Appendix XI for the argument as set forth by Uddyotakara. Cf. the
comparable argumentative style in VV 18: yadi cāhetoḥ siddhiḥ svabhāvavinivarta-
nasya te bhavati || svābhāvyasyāstitvam mamāpi nirhetukam siddham ||. The commen-
tary reads (VVed 53): atha manyase nirhetukī siddhir niḥsvabhāvatvasya bhāvānām iti
yathā tava svabhāvavinivartanam nirhetukam siddham tathā mamāpi svabhāva-
sadbhāvo nirhetukaḥ siddhaḥ |.
Garfield's (2008: 512, n. 8) translation (from the Tibetan) of the latter half of the
objection, starting with the present one, is problematic. The construction gang las …..
'di nyid las (in the sentence yang na khyed kyi dngos po rnams skye ba med do zhes
bya ba'i nges pa 'di gang las gyur pa 'di nyid las nga’i dngos po thams cad yod pa
yin no zhes bya ba yang yin la ), which translates yataḥ tata eva, certainly does
not mean "to the extent that." The following sentence's nga'i
yang-for
mamāpi-(the sentence reads: yang ji ltar khyod kyi dngos po thams cad skye ba med
do zhes bya ba'i nges pa 'dir 'gyur ba de kho na ltar nga'i dngos po thams cad skye
bar yang 'gyur ro ||) has been incorrectly construed by Garfield (ibid.) with dngos po
thams cad, which has resulted in the unusual translation "In the same way that you
are certain of your statement ‘all phenomena are unarisen' I can be certain that all of
my phenomena are arisen." The final sentence des na dngos po thams cad bkag pa
med par yod pa yin no, translating iti santy apratiṣiddhāḥ sarvabhāvāḥ, has also been
wrongly translated as "Therefore, the existence of no entities has been refuted!"PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
207
And just as there is this ascertainment for you that all things have
not arisen, so indeed can there also be for me the arising of all
things. But if this ascertainment that all things have not arisen
does not exist for you,4¹1 then, because it is impossible to con-
vince another of something that has not been ascertained by
oneself,4¹2 undertaking the [Madhyamaka-]treatise would be
absolutely pointless. Thus, all things, unrefuted, do exist.
Reply: If something called ascertainment existed for us,413 it would
either stem from valid cognition or not stem from valid cognition.
But [it] does not exist. Why [not]? According to our system (iha), if
non-ascertainment (aniścaya) were possible, there might be its
counterpart (pratipakṣa), [i.e.,] the ascertainment which relies on that
[non-ascertainment].4¹4 Yet when, first of all, [that] very non-
411
¹ It should be noted that with this third alternative the opponent is not assuming that
the Mādhyamika now retreats and retracts his assertion, i.e., denies that he has
ascertained the true status of things, as Dan Arnold's translation of the first part of
the sentence leads one to presume: "Or [perhaps you will say] you have no certainty
[to the effect that] ‘all existents are unproduced.' In that case, ..." (cf. Arnold 2005b:
420; 2005a: 146). Garfield (2008: 512, n. 8) follows the same interpretation: “If,
however, you,[sic] have no certainty about the idea that all phenomena are unarisen
....". Seyfort Ruegg's (2002: 96) translation is worded more ambiguously: “But if,
for you, there is no ascertainment that all entities are unoriginated, ...". In fact, the
opponent is allowing the Madhyamika to maintain his view of the non-existence of
the physical, linguistic and conceptual components of the world (note the placement
of asti) but, putting an elegant twist on things, points out the devastating consequence
that the Madhyamika's insistence on consistency entails.
4¹2 Tib interprets niścitasya as a subjective genitive indicating the person: de'i tshe
rang nyid kyis kyang ma nges pas gzhan khong du chud par byed pa mi srid pa'i phyir
("then, because it is not possible for someone who himself does not have any cer-
tainty to convince another ...”).
413 PSPM §83 reply (PsP₁ 56.4): yadi kaścin niścayo nāmāsmākaṇ syāt. Cp. VV 29ab₁:
yadi kācana pratijñā syān me. For comments on the latter, see n. 136.
414 Tenets held receive their legitimacy, in the opinion of the Naiyāyika, from means
of valid cognition. The attempt to verify a thing / state of affairs has as its starting
point uncertainty about and non-ascertainment of this thing / state of affairs; non-
ascertainment is replaced by ascertainment when direct perception or another pramā-
na is able to provide confirmation. Candrakīrti is thought to have been cornered into
having to admit a means of valid cognition that has arisen from self or other, etc., i.e.,
an existent means of valid cognition, which will contradict the statement that nothing208
TRANSLATION
whatsoever arises, or into having to abandon his position. He skillfully and easily
extracts himself from the Naiyāyika trap by pointing out that from the ultimate point
of view, from which the assertion that things have not arisen is made, not even the
starting point of an investigation, i.e., non-ascertainment, exists. And when not even
this can exist, then an ensuing ascertainment definitely cannot exist. For Candrakīrti,
aniscaya is a worldly concept which has its counterpart in the concept niścaya (for
Madhyamikas, concepts are also considered to be constituents of the world);
ultimately neither exist. The conceptual pair niścaya/aniścaya is comparable to the
conceptual pair śubha/aśubha (for the MMK argument refuting the conceptual pair
śubha/aśubha, see the following note).
Previous interpretations of niscaya and aniścaya and of the first sentences of the
passage include the following. According to Stcherbatsky (1927: 137, n. 1),
"aniscaya evidently means a problematic judgment.” Sprung (1979: 50) translates
niscaya as "assertion" and aniscaya as “negative assertion": "In your thinking, where
there is a negative assertion (aniścaya) there would have to be a counter assertion
which, with reference to the first, would be positive." Siderits (1981: 123), who
speaks of "conviction” and “non-conviction," attempts to understand aniścaya by
taking reference to the VV: "We are reminded here of Nāgārjuna's statement (VV
30) that he neither affirms nor denies any thesis. We may then take ‘aniścaya' to
refer to any statement which is metaphysical in nature, i.e., is intended as a charac-
terization of the ultimate nature of reality, and which contradicts the claim that all
existents are empty. In this case Candrakīrti is claiming that there is no aniścaya
which the Madhyamika is called upon to refute." Although I would not disagree that
the claim under attack here in the PsP, namely, anutpannā bhavāḥ, reminds one of
the claim śūnyāḥ sarvabhāvāḥ under attack in the VV, and would agree that
Candrakīrti's procedure here in the PsP resembles, to a certain degree, that of Nā-
garjuna's in VV 29, I see no grounds for assuming that aniścaya is intended to relate
to statements contradicting the Madhyamaka claim. Huntington (2003: 78) renders
niścaya and aniścaya of our passage as “certainty” and “uncertainty," but, denying
Candrakīrti his denial of the world and seeing the Madhyamaka project as merely
encouraging and aiming to fully enable a life lived without clinging, superimposes
meaning onto the pair unintended by Candrakīrti. He writes, “According to Candra-
kīrti, it is absolutely essential that this compulsive desire, or need, for certainty-and
its contrary, the fear of uncertainty-be seen for what they are, insurmountable
obstacles to any real appreciation of Nāgārjuna's philosophy, for they only serve to
reinforce the tendency to crave and cling." Arnold (2005a: 146ff.), considering the
opponent to be Dignāga, is of the opinion that Candrakīrti is stating that he has no
“doubt” or “certainty” because he (Candrakīrti) rejects that his claim of non-arising
requires the a posteriori justification, via pramāṇas, the Epistemologist deems
necessary for establishment of the claim. According to Arnold, seeking this sort of
justification is incoherent because the pramāṇas that Dignāga holds provide certainty
"are themselves possible only given the truth of Candrakīrti's claim (that is, that
everything is empty-qua-interdependent)—a fact that must therefore be knowable
prior to the exercise of any such epistemic factors. This is the point of Candrakīrti'sPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
209
ascertainment does not exist for us, then how could there be its
opposite, [i.e.,] ascertainment, since it (= ascertainment) would not be
reliant on something related to [it], like the shortness and longness of
a donkey's horn [do not rely on each other].4¹5 And when in this way
rejoining that there is no possibility of doubt with respect to his claim." To
understand Arnold's interpretation one needs to be aware of the fact that he does not
consider Candrakīrti to be denying the existence of things but rather to maintain the
view that things, including concepts and statements, do indeed really exist, but do so
only in (inter)dependence. It is difficult to defend Arnold's position, and my own
view of the general Madhyamaka stance stands in contradistinction to it. Garfield's
(2008: 512, n. 8) non-foundationalist interpretation of Madhyamaka that, like
Arnold's, allows him to preserve the existence of the world may explain his
translating pratipakṣa as "antidote"; he translates the passage beginning with ihāni-
scayasambhave sati as: "Since, according to us, where there is uncertainty, in
dependence on that, certainty is achieved as its antidote in the case where there is no
uncertainty, how can certainty arise as its opposite, since it depends on its opposite?
This is just like a donkey's horn being long or short!"
415 The logic behind the idea that ascertainment cannot exist if its counterpart, non-
ascertainment, does not exist, because its existence requires the existence of another
related to it, is set forth in somewhat more detail in a parallel case in Candrakīrti’s
commentary on MMK XXIII.10 (XXIII.10: anapekṣya śubham nāsty aśubham pra-
jñapayemahi | yat pratītya śubham tasmāc chubham naivopapadyate ||: “Repulsive, in
dependence on which we might designate attractive, does not exist independent of
attractive. Therefore, attractive is simply not logically possible”). Candrakīrti com-
ments (the underlined compounds find partial correspondences in the passage under
discussion in the first chapter): iha yadi śubham nāma kimcit syān niyatam tad
aśubham apekṣya bhaved pārāvāravad bījānkuravad hrasvadīrghavad vā śubhasya
sambandhyantarapadārthasāpekṣatvāt tac cāpy apekṣanīyam aśubham śubhena vinā
nāsti | anapekṣya śubham aśubham nāsti | śubhanirapekṣam aśubham nāstīty
abhiprāyaḥ | yad aśubham pratītya yad aśubham apekṣya śubham prajñapayemahi
vyavasthāpayemahi | yataś caivam śubhasya prajñaptau sambandhyantaram
apekṣaṇīyam aśubhākhyam padārthāntaram nāsti tasmāc chubham naivopapadyate
hrasvāsambhavād iva dīrgham pārāsambhavād ivāvāram ity abhiprāyaḥ (PSP₁
458.13-459.5; corrected following mss P, D, B and de Jong 1978: 239. De Jong
corrects padārthāntaram to padārtham, but does not mention that his manuscript
reads padārthāntaram padartham, and seems to have overlooked that a nominative
form is required. P is severely damaged at this point, but attests the remains of the
akṣaras in question. Tib reads gang gi phyir de ltar na sdug par gdags pa la| mi sdug
pa zhes bya bar bltos par bya ba dngos po 'brel pa can gzhan yod pa ma yin pa |. In
the parallel construction at PsP₁ 459.14, B and D attest padārthāntaram nāsti [the
text in P is missing; Tib as above]). Candrakīrti argues that repulsive does not exist
on its own, independent of attractive, i.e., as an independently established entity in
regard to which attractive could then be named/designated in dependence, i.e., be210
TRANSLATION
ascertainment does not exist, then for the sake of the establishment of
what will we postulate means of valid cognition? Or how might there
be their number (sankhyā), characteristic (lakṣaṇa) [and] object
(visaya) [or their] arising from self, from other, from both, or without
a cause? None of this need be asserted by us.
§84. [Opponent:] If ascertainment thus does not exist for you, still,
why is this assertion (vākya) “not from self, nor from other, nor from
both or without a cause, do things come to be," which has the form
,9416
dependently established, for repulsive, in its turn, requires that attractive be
established independently so that it can be established in dependence on it (see also
MMK XXIII.11). The same vicious circle will hold for the conceptual pair ascertain-
ment and non-ascertainment. Ascertainment can be designated/established only in
dependence on an independently existing counterpart, and since this does not exist,
ascertainment is not logically possible. In the example, shortness and length are
meant to parallel non-ascertainment and ascertainment. If non-ascertainment, like the
(impossible) shortness of something non-existent, does not exist, then ascertainment
cannot exist, in the same way that length, deprived of its counterpart, shortness,
cannot exist (and vice-versa). See also the comments and references in Seyfort
Ruegg 2002: 97, n. 159. Oetke has argued convincingly against allegations that
certain arguments in the MMK that appear to take the step from “If p, then q” to “If
not p, then not q” violate the “law of contraposition"; see Oetke 1992.
Candrakīrti's reply provides an appropriate answer to the critique, and is in strict
conformity with the Madhyamaka stance; any characterization of the move as
evasive is to misunderstand Candrakīrti. He will, however, with his reply to the next
question say that the assertion (vākya) that nothing arises is ascertained by the world.
Still, the constructs of the surface level cannot be applied to the ultimate level; from
the point of view of the ultimate, prameyas and pramāṇas and the issue of the latter
are impossible.
It might be noted that Candrakīrti argues in other of his works that cognition
(vijñāna)—in the form of which or in conjunction with which worldly means of valid
cognition function-stops when the ultimate is realized, for cognition (and thus any
ascertainment connected with or derived from it) is impossible when one is in the
state where nothing appears. He does, however, reveal in his commentary on MMK
XXV.16 that gnosis (jñāna), which he qualifies as non-existing and non-arisen, but
also as transcending all manifoldness (sarvaprapañcātītarūpa), has emptiness as its
object-support; see MacDonald 2009.
416 The opponent includes MMK I.1ab (na svato nāpi parato na dvābhyām nāpy
ahetuto) in his version of the Madhyamikas' vākya. PsP Tib does not translate bha-
vanti; a shed followed by iti closes its citation of MMK I.1ab.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
211
of something that has been ascertained (niścitarūpa), found among
you?417
Reply: This assertion is ascertained by world (loka) by way of
reasoning (upapatti) acknowledged exclusively by [the world it]self;
[it is] not [ascertained] by the Nobles (ārya).
§85. [Opponent:] Does there really not exist [any] reasoning for the
Nobles?418
[Reply:] Who says this: "[Reasoning] exists" or "[Reasoning] does
not exist"? For the ultimate (paramārtha) is noble silence (āryas
417 Now that it has become clear to the opponent that the Madhyamikas deny even
ascertainment, he asks why one nevertheless finds them setting forth the thesis that
nothing exists. katham can have the meaning of either "how" or "why," and in the
present sentence it is intended in the latter sense. The unexpected switch in the
sentence from bhavataḥ to bhavatām, if not due to early interference or scribal error,
appears to indicate that in the initial instance the opponent addresses his comment
directly to Candrakīrti, his immediate partner in conversation, but in the second
refers to the use of the statement by Madhyamikas in general. The interpretations of
the sentence by previous translators are less satisfactory. Huntington (2003: 78): “.
then why does your statement appear to be certain?"; Garfield (2008: 512, n. 8):
... how can you be certain that you understand the purport of the statement
Arnold (2005b: 421): “…. then how is your own statement understood?"; Seyfort
Ruegg (2002: 98): ' how does your honour apprehend ... the [following sentence]
...?". Interestingly, Stcherbatsky (1927: 137) understood the question correctly; he
paraphrases: “But we hear from you a proposition which looks like a definite
assertion .... How is that (to be explained)?".
?”;
66
66
418 I understand the inclusion of khalu in the sentence as intending insistence on the
part of the opponent, to the effect of "Would you make yourself clear, please!"
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 99, n. 166) suggests that the sentence is probably not an
opponent's objection and rather a question posed by a student of Candrakīrti's, or
alternatively a question that “Candrakīrti as a philosopher might ask himself." I see
no reason not to understand the question as part of the continued discussion with the
Naiyāyika. Arnold (2005b: 421), who incorporates the sentence into Candrakīrti's
previous response and thus has Candrakīrti rhetorically ask himself the question,
would seem to share Seyfort Ruegg's opinion. Stcherbatsky's (1927: 137)
interpretation is similar to mine, and is in fact perhaps more to the point as regards
khalu: "Do you really mean to say that these Saints (believe in) no argument?"212
TRANSLATION
tuṣṇībhāvaḥ); 41⁹ thus how is there [any] possibility of [disquieting
subjective] proliferation (prapañca) in that [silence], so that there
might be reasoning or [its counterpart,] non-reasoning (anu-
papatti)?420
419
PsP Tib: 'phags pa rnams kyi don dam pa ni cang mi gsung ba yin te for
paramārtho hy āryas tūṣṇībhāvas. De Jong (1978: 33) writes, "Tibetan 'phags pa
rnams kyi (āryāṇām) is an interpretation and not a translation.” As he notes, the
expression ariyo tuṇhībhāvo is common in Pāli texts. Cf. the Kolitasutta of the SN,
where Mahamoggallāna explains noble silence in connection with the second concen-
tration which lacks thought and reflection: Idha mayham āvuso rahogatassa
patisallīnassa evam cetaso parivitakko udapādi || Ariyo tuṇhībhāvo ariyo tuṇhībhāvo
ti vuccati || Katamo nu kho ariyo tunhībhāvo ti || Tassa mayham āvuso etad ahosi ||
Idha bhikkhu vitakkavicārānam vūpasamā ajjhattam sampasādanam cetaso
ekodibhāvam avitakkam avicāram samādhijam pītisukham dutiyam jhānam
upasampajja viharati || Ayam vuccati ariyo tunhībhāvoti (SN II.273). Bodhi (SN₁r
713) translates, “Here, friends, while I was alone in seclusion, a reflection arose in
my mind thus: ‘It is said, “noble silence, noble silence." What now is noble silence?’
Then, friends, it occurred to me: 'Here, with the subsiding of thought and
examination, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the second jhāna, which has internal
confidence and unification of mind, is without thought and examination, and has
rapture and happiness born of concentration. This is called noble silence." In the
MN, in a different context, monks are advised by the Buddha to do either of two
things when they assemble: they should hold discussion on the Dharma or maintain
noble silence: Sannipatitānam vo bhikkhave dvayam karaṇīyam: dhammī vā kathā
ariyo vā tuṇhībhāvo (MN I.161.33-34; cf. MN₁ 254). Bodhi (MN 1215, n. 298)
notes that the MN-attha "points out that the second jhāna and one's basic meditation
subject are both called 'noble silence."" De Jong (1978: 33) refers to the Pāli
Tipitakam Concordance (Vol. II, p. 244b) for further references for ariyo tuṇhībhāvo;
see also BHSD s.v. tūṣṇī. Here in the PsP, as Candrakīrti makes known in the next
clause, "noble silence” refers to the state in which subjective prapañca, i.e., mental
speech (abhidhāna; manojalpa) has ceased, along with, of course, the verbal
expression of this. prapañca in the present instance seems clearly, in being contrasted
to the calm of silence, to contain nuances of disquiet, restlessness, and disturbance.
On the silence of the awakened ones, see, e.g., Nagao 1955; Gomez 1976; Oetke
1994; Seyfort Ruegg 2000: 154f.; 1977: 12, 19; 1981: 34f.; La Vallée Poussin 1933:
40.
tr
999
420 Candrakīrti has stated that logical reasoning (upapatti) is employed only by the
world, and that it brings about, solely for the world, the ascertainment (niścaya) that
things do not arise. In the present paragraph he explains to the opponent that the
spiritually attained have achieved a state that transcends all linguistic and conceptual
activity and is as a result free from all mental agitation and unrest. As he explains in
other passages, it is a state without objective support, and in the absence of anyPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
213
§86. [Opponent:] [Well, the question is] obvious: 421 How indeed, if
the Nobles do not formulate [any] reasoning, will they now bring the
world to understand the ultimate?
[Reply:] The Nobles certainly do not formulate [any] reasoning [of
their own] by way of worldly linguistic practice (lokasamvyava-
hāra);422 but adopting, for the sake of the comprehension of others,
objective support the application of predicates like "exists" or "does not exist" is
impossible.
Many of the previous translators of the paragraph have understood the sentence
kenaitad uktam asti vā nāsti veti to mean that it is not possible to know if the Nobles
take recourse to reasoning/arguments or not; cf. Stcherbatsky 1927: 137; Huntington
2003: 78: "Who can say whether they do or they don't?”; Garfield 2008: 512, n. 8;
Arnold 2005b: 421 (the exception is Seyfort Ruegg [cf. 2002: 99]). Lamotte (1987:
317, n. 43), commenting on Vimalakīrti's silence, translates following Stcherbatsky:
"Qui donc pourrait dire si les saints ont ou n'ont pas d'argument? En effet l'absolu,
c'est le silence des saints. Comment donc une discussion avec eux sur ce sujet serait-
elle possible [et comment pourrions-nous savoir] s'ils ont ou n'ont pas d'argument en
cette matière?" The point of the rhetorical question kenaitad uktam asti vā nāsti veti,
as is made clear by the sentence following it, is that mental activity does not occur at
all when ordinary consciousness has come to rest, i.e., has ceased; it certainly does
not intend to convey the idea that the Nobles might be mentally active and might
spend time formulating arguments but that we as ordinary beings do not have access
to this information. On the various interpretations of the Buddha's silence, see Oetke
1994.
PSP Tib reads de'i phyir gang la 'thad pa dang 'thad pa ma yin pa mi mnga' bar
'gyur ba de dag la spros pa mnga' bar ga la 'gyur ||: “Therefore, how could those
who do not have reasoning or non-reasoning have prapañca?" instead of the ex-
pected de'i phyir gang las 'thad pa dang 'thad pa ma yin par 'gyur ba de la spros pa
yod pa ga la 'gyur for tataḥ kutas tatra prapañcasambhavo yata upapattir anupa-
pattir vā syāt. The sentence as it appears in the Tibetan does not make much sense.
De La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 57, n. 2) has noted the discrepancy and reconstructs the
Sanskrit as tasmād yatropapattyanupapattyasambhavas tatra prapañcasambhavaḥ
kutaḥ. Possibly the translators read tataḥ kutas tatra prapañcasambhavo yatra
upapattir anupapattir vā syāt, i.e., read yatra for yata(h) and added a negation in
order to try to make some sense of the sentence.
421
I understand hi as expressing the obviousness of the problem posed by the
opponent. My translation may give too much emphasis to the hi but I have not been
able to come up with a better solution.
422 In general, vyavahāra refers to physical, verbal and/or mental activity/practice.
Here, samvyavahāra, qualified by loka, refers to the linguistic activity engaged in and
focussed on by the persons of the world (conceptual activity is not excluded, but it214
TRANSLATION
does not stand in the foreground in the present context). lokavyavahāra is in fact the
third meaning Candrakīrti gives for samvṛti in his commentary on MMK XXIV.8:
atha vā samvṛtiḥ samketo lokavyavahāra ity arthaḥ | sa cābhidhānābhidheya-
jñānajñeyādilakṣaṇaḥ || (PsP₁ 492.11-12) “Or, samvṛti is convention, the meaning is:
worldly practice. And it has the characteristic of name and what is named, cognition
and what is cognized, etc." Seyfort Ruegg (1981: 74) paraphrases this definition as
"worldly transactional usage (lokavyavahāra) defined in terms of the relation of a
designation to its designatum and of a cognition to the object of cognition." One
might understand the definition as referring to worldly linguistic practice as it relates
to the dependent pairs referred to in Candrakīrti's second etymologically based
definition of samvrti (parasparasambhavanam vā samvṛtir anyonyasamāśrayeṇety
arthaḥ [PSP₁ 492.11]).
ed
The compound *lokavyavahāra ('jig rten snyad) of ŚS kārikā 1 is elucidated in the
ŚSV. According to the SSV, the compound's first word "world" (*loka) refers to the
person (*pudgala, gang zag) who/which is designated in reliance on the [five]
constituents (*skandha, phung po). Persons are differentiated into two groups,
namely, those whose sense organs are not impaired by the timira visual condition,
etc., and those whose sense organs are impaired (cp. MA VI.24 and commentary).
Only the former group is called the "world," for the latter is not an authority from the
point of view of the world. “Linguistic practice” (*vyavahāra) is said to be that which
brings about in the continuum of another the understanding of things—things whose
manifoldness is [merely] imagined that one wants the other to understand (... gzhan
gyis khong du chud par 'dod pa'i dngos po kun nas rtog pa'i dngos po sna tshogs pa
gzhan gyi rgyud la rtogs pa 'jug par byed pa la tha snyad ces brjod do ||; ŚSV.
213.14-16). The commentary also alludes to the conceptual aspect of vyavahāra (thus
vyavahāra understood as including thought and mental “speech”), stating that in the
way worldly persons bring about [via speech] the mutual understanding of the things
they want understood, or understand [directly] the things they want to know, so, i.e.,
correspondingly, do they establish in regard to those things the relationship of the
thing to be named with [its] name (*abhidheyābhidhāna), and the relationship of the
thing to be cognized with [the] cognition [that knows it] (*jñeyajñāna), so that at a
another time conventional linguistic practice is not disturbed. Thus "linguistic
practice" is stated in regard to the [respective] object that has the characteristic of,
i.e., consists in, name and what is named and cognition and what is cognized, whose
coming into existence is produced by mere error (ji ltar ’jig rten pa rtogs par 'dod
pa'i don phan tshun du rtogs par byed pa'am | shes par 'dod pa'i don khong du chud
pa de bzhin du don de la brjod bya rjod byed kyi 'brel pa dang | shes bya shes byed du
rnam par 'jog par byed cing | dus gzhan du yang tha snyad kyi gdams pa mi 'chad
pa'i don du | de la 'di ltar rjod byed dang brjod bya dang | shes pa dang shes bya’i
mtshan nyid can gyi don phyin ci log tsam gyis nye bar bskyed pa'i dag nyid kyi dngos
po la tha snyad ces brjod ...; SSV 213.17-22; cf. SSV 37f. and notes).
ed
trPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
215
reasoning which is acknowledged only from the side of the world,
they through it alone-cause the world to understand.423 For [it is]
just as [in the following example]: Desirous persons who are involved
in error (viparyāsānugata)4²4 do not perceive the impurity (aśucitā) of
the body even though [this impurity] exists [right in front of them],
and having superimposed an unreal aspect of attractiveness (su-
bhākāra) [onto the body, they] are defiled.425 For the sake of their
[reaching] a state of dispassion (vairāgya), [a magical being] created
by the Tathāgata, or a god, would describe the faults of the body
which had previously been hidden by the notion (sañjñā) of attract-
iveness, with [the statement], "There are hairs on this body," etc.42
And on account of the disappearance of that notion of attractiveness
they would reach a state of dispassion. [It is] like that here too:
Ordinary persons (prthagjana), having superimposed inasmuch as
the eye of their minds is impaired by the timira of ignorance—an
423 Cf. Candrakīrti on MMK XXII.11 (XXII.11abc: śünyam ity apy avaktavyam
aśūnyam iti vā bhavet | ubhayam nobhayam ceti): sarvam etan na vaktavyam
asmābhiḥ | kim tu anuktam yathāvadavasthitam svabhāvam pratipattā pratipattum na
samartha iti ato vayam api āropato vyavahārasatya eva sthitvā vyavahārārtham
vineyajanānurodhena śūnyam ity api brūmaḥ aśūnyam ity api śūnyāśūnyam ity api
naiva śūnyam nāśūnyam ity api brūmaḥ (PsP₁ 444.3-6; corrected following ms P and
de Jong 1978: 236; ms P reads... kin tuktam yathāvad ...).
424 PSP Tib takes anugata to be intended in an active sense: phyin ci log gi rjes su
song ba'i 'dod chags can rnams kyis "Desirous persons who follow perverted views
(viparyāsa) …..”, which seems equally acceptable.
425 Cf. PsP to MMK XXIII.7: tad eṣām kleśānām rūpādikam ṣaḍvidham vastv
ālambanam bhavati | tatra śubhākārādhyāropeṇa yathā rūpādibhyo rāga upajāyate.
(PSP₁ 457.6-7).
426
Cp. MN 1.57.13-20: Puna ca param bhikkhave bhikkhu imam eva kāyam uddham
pādatalā adho kesamatthakā tacapariyantam pūran nānappakārassa asucino
paccavekkhati: Atthi imasmim kāye kesā lomā nakhā dantā taco mamsam nahāru aṭṭhī
atthimiñjā vakkam hadayam yakanam kilomakam pihakam papphāsam antam
antaguṇam udariyam karīsam, pittam semham pubbo lohitam sedo medo assu vasā
kheļo singhāṇikā lasikā muttan ti. Ñāṇamoli and Bodhi (1995: 147) translate: “Again,
bhikkhus, a bhikkhu reviews this same body up from the soles of the feet and down
from the top of the hair, bounded by skin, as full of many kinds of impurity thus: ‘In
this body there are head-hairs, body-hairs, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones,
bone-marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, large intestines, small
intestines, contents of the stomach, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears,
grease, spittle, snot, oil of the joints, and urine.""216
TRANSLATION
erroneous own-being of things, which has the nature of not being
perceived in any way whatsoever by the Nobles, and [also having
superimposed, once own-being has been imagined,] some quality
(viseșa) onto cases (kvacit) [of imagined own-being], become ex-
tremely defiled.427 Now, the Nobles cause them to fully understand by
way of reasoning acknowledged only by those [ordinary persons,
such as]:428 "Just as it is accepted [by you] that there is no [re-]arising
from clay, etc., of a pot that [already] exists, so should it be
ascertained that there is no arising of a pot [claimed to] exist prior to
arising, because it [already] exists. And just as it is accepted [by you]
that there is not the arising of a sprout from a flame or a glowing coal
and so forth, [i.e., from things] that are other [than the sprout], so
should it be determined that there is not [the arising of a sprout] from
427 As regards the meaning of "a certain quality onto cases [of imagined own-being],"
see also below §88 where Candrakīrti declares that the first chapter of the MMK was
composed as an antidote to the superimposition of an own-form (svarūpa
svabhāva) of things and that the rest of the chapters were composed to refute any
qualities (visesa) that might further be superimposed in various cases of this
imagined own-being. Clarifying that he intends all possible qualities which might be
applied to dependent-arising, he exemplifies them with three qualities refuted in the
second chapter of the MMK, to wit, “goer, what is gone [over] and going." Arnold
(2005b: 422) translates pariklisyanti (and the previous pariklisyante) as “suffer," but
the word is intended in its BHS meaning (cf. BHSD s.v. kliśyati "becomes soiled”);
that is, people are defiled, or as Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 100) translates, “sullied,” by
the wrong views. That they will suffer at some point as a consequence of their
superimposition of svabhāva is an expected result, but this future suffering is not
relevant in the present context.
=
428 The sentence in PsP Tib begins with de dag da ltar 'phags pa rnams kyis, which is
immediately followed by the two arguments (bum pa yod pa nges par gyis shig ...
me dang sol ba ... nges par gyis shig ||). The translation for tatprasiddhayaivopapattyā
paribodhayanti does not appear either at the beginning of this sentence or, as might
be expected, after the two exemplifications of arguments, but rather has been added
to the end of Candrakīrti's reply to the objection concerning experience (anubhava:
see the text's next paragraph). This section closes: bsgrub par bya ba dang
mtshungs pa nyid yin pa'i phyir des phyir bzlog par rigs pa ma yin no zhes de dag la
grags pa nyid kyis khong du chud par mdzad pa yin no || (upapattyā has not been
translated). The translators (or a scribe in the tradition of one of their Sanskrit
manuscripts) may have considered the reasoning in the anubhava section to belong
generally to the exemplification of reasonings used to convince the world, and thus
decided that the phrase's proper place was at the close of the anubhava section, and
not after the argument against the arising of a sprout from a seed.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
217
a seed and so forth, even though [these are] alleged (vivakṣita) [to be
conditions]."429
§87. Even if there would be [the objection]: [But] this is our
experience! 430
42⁹ Both of these arguments, that is, the argument against arising from self and the
argument against arising from other, were presented earlier in the chapter; see above
§29 and §51.
430 Compare the defense found in NBh on NS IV.2.33. The Buddhist opponent has
argued in NS IV.2.31 that the imagining of means of valid cognition and what is
cognized is like the (erroneous) imagining of objects in a dream (NS IV.2.31:
svapnaviṣayābhimānavad ayam pramāṇaprameyābhimānaḥ; cf. NBh 273). Com-
menting on NS IV.2.33, which rejects the Buddhist proposition because there is no
reason that supports it (IV.2.33: hetvabhāvād asiddhiḥ), Vātsyāyana has the Buddhist
present the reason "because of non-perception when one is awake" (NBh 274.1:
pratibodhe ʼnupalambhād iti cet). He responds to this by stating that this reason is in
fact capable of proving the opposite of what the Buddhist wants to prove, i.e., that the
things perceived when one is awake do exist because they are perceived: pratibodha-
viṣayopalambhād apratiṣedhaḥ | yadi pratibodhe nupalambhāt svapne viṣayā na
santi tarhi ya ime pratibuddhena viṣayā upalabhyante te upalambhāt santīti | viparya-
ye hi hetusāmarthyam | upalambhāt sadbhāve saty anupalambhād abhāvaḥ siddhyati |
ubhayathā tv abhāve nānupalambhasya sāmarthyam asti yathā pradīpasyābhāvād
rūpasyādarśanam iti tatra bhāvenābhāvaḥ samarthyata iti | (NBh 274.1-5). "There is
not refutation [of our view that things exist] because there is the perception of objects
when one is awake. If the objects in a dream do not exist on account of the non-
perception [of them] when one is awake, then these objects that are perceived by one
who is awake do exist, [precisely] because of [their] perception; for the reason is
capable [of proving] the opposite [of your thesis]. [Only] when real existence on the
basis of perception is [accepted] can non-existence on the basis of non-perception be
established. But when [as you maintain] there is the non-existence [of objects] in
both cases [i.e., in dreams and when one is awake], non-perception is not suitable. It
is like not seeing colour in the absence of lamplight: in this case, the non-existence
[of colour] is determined by way of [its] existence [when there is light].” This argu-
ment is certainly more elaborate than the PSP sentence, but it too grounds itself in the
view that direct perception, or, as the PSP opponents put it, "experience," is trust-
worthy, and it provides reasoned justification for this position in the light of the
Buddhist's argument: the things that we both agree are unreal can be determined to
be such only in dependence on the truly existing correlates given to us by direct
perception. *LȚ's author explains that that which is experienced is the arising of a
sprout from a seed, etc. (anubhava iti | bījādibhya evāṁku[ra]syotpattir ity eṣaḥ
(Yonezawa 2004: 124, 141 [fol. 2b3]).218
TRANSLATION
431
[we will reply that] this too is unreasonable, since this experience
(anubhava) is false (mṛṣā),4³¹ because it is experience (anubhavatvāt),
like the experience of a double moon and so forth by those with [the
visual disorder] timira [is false]. And therefore, since experience as
well is similar to the probandum (sādhyasama), an objection by way
of it is not appropriate.432
§88. Therefore, to begin with, the initial chapter [of the Madhya-
makaśāstra] commences thus [i.e., by declaring that] “Things have
not arisen,"433 [that is,] with an antidote to the superimposition of
erroneous own nature. Now [after that],434 in order to refute whatever
qualities have been superimposed in cases [of imagined own nature],
the rest of the chapters are undertaken, for the sake of demonstrating
that no quality either, such as goer, what is gone [over], or going
(gantrgantavyagamana),435 exists for dependent-arising.43
431 The Tibetan does not present a literal translation for yasmād anubhava eṣa mṛṣā
and instead attests 'di ltar nyams su myong ba ni brdzun pa'i don can yin te. The
Sanskrit and Tibetan sādhyas set forth different claims, the former focussed on
experience itself, the latter on its object. The manuscript on which this sentence is
based may have been damaged at this point; eșa appears to have been read as artha.
432 Candrakīrti sets forth an inference acknowledged only by the opponent. On the
logical fault sādhyasama, see n. 257.
433
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 101) follows the Tibetan in translating the following
pratipakṣeṇa as “as a counteragent” (PsP Tib: gnyen por).
435
434 The Tibetan's de nas for idānīm expresses the implication of the Sanskrit's "now."
The translators, not using a convention like square brackets, on occasion chose to
present the sense of a word instead of its literal translation. *LȚ's author glosses
idānīm with prathamaprakaraṇānantaram (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 124, 142 [fol. 2b3]).
gantr, gantavyam and gamanam are refuted in MMK II. On the argumentation in
this chapter, see especially Oetke 2001a: 59-88 (for his critique of Garfield's trans-
lation of the chapter, see 184-191) and Oetke 2004. Dan Arnold (2005b: 424 and n.
41), in contradistinction to Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 102), interprets de La Vallée
Poussin's half-daṇḍa at the end of PsP 58.11 as a full stop and thus reads the part of
the sentence beginning with gantṛgantavyagamanādikaḥ as a new sentence, with the
result that he must supply (misleading) material in brackets: “Now, the remainder of
the treatise is undertaken for the sake of refuting some qualifications that are imputed
in particular cases. Dependent origination does not have any single qualification, not
even such as being the agent, the locus, or the action of motion [this treatise is
undertaken] for the sake of showing [that]"; the focus, however, in the second part ofPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
219
the sentence is still on what is refuted in the rest of the chapters, and not in the entire
treatise, i.e., including chapter one.
436 The paragraph is intended as Candrakīrti's conclusion to his extended
conversation with the Naiyāyikas, but it can also be seen as a response to the con-
cluding sentence of the original critique he cited to commence the discussion. The
Naiyāyikas ended this critique by asserting that things are indeed established as
arisen (santy apratiṣiddhāḥ sarvabhāvāḥ) and that the composition of the treatise,
namely, the MMK, is pointless (śāstrārambhavaiyarthyam eva). Candrakīrti, having
earlier refuted their arguments, now reiterates the Madhyamaka position, i.e., that
things are unarisen (anutpannā bhāvāḥ) and connects it with the first chapter of the
MMK, explaining that this chapter serves to counter the erroneous superimposition
of own-being; he then declares the subject matter and purpose of the rest of the
chapters of the MMK. The MMK thus defended as having an extremely important
purpose, he commences his offensive against Dignāga by pronouncing that the effort
put into his treatise was pointless.
The transition from the discussion with the Naiyāyikas to the attack on Dignāga thus
appears, from the perspective just described, to be quite smooth. Stcherbatsky (1927:
140, n. 4), on the other hand, surmises that the first chapter originally ended with the
present paragraph, adding that the discussion which follows "looks like a later
addition." Stcherbatsky's (ibid., 139) free translation accordingly indicates that he
understood idānīm as signalling the commencement of the rest of the chapters: "The
remaining parts of the treatise are now (concerned with details)." Of course, as the
chapter is now structured, Candrakīrti has only commented on the first of the
fourteen kārikās of the first chapter of the MMK, but Stcherbatsky's observation may
have some merit. One has to agree that the employment of idānīm here is unusual,
and that the sentence including it or one similar to it would not be out of place
introducing the second chapter of the MMK. I do not think that we need to go as far
as Stcherbatsky and assume that the altercation with Dignāga is a later addition, i.e.,
material inserted by a later scholar (if this is what he meant), but it is possible that
Candrakīrti, in the course of composing the first chapter, or the larger PsP, revised
the first chapter's material, re-locating sentences and paragraphs, adding new
sentences and even entire sections. As a result of the revisions, some of the originally
seamless transitions between passages may have been disturbed, as in the present
case, where the remaining idānīm seems misplaced (compare also, e.g., PsPµ §70
[PSP₁ 39.8], where the concluding statement links up better with the mangala ślokas
than with MMK I.1). We must also keep in mind that information related to the
process of the creation and composition of the Indian works is extremely sparse.
Helmut Krasser hypothesizes that some texts that have been held to represent direct
compositions by Indian masters are actually student class notes; see Krasser 2011
and Krasser 2012a: 569ff.
Sprung (1979: xiii-xv), following up on Stcherbatsky's idea that the first chapter
ended with the present paragraph, opines that “[t]he lengthy and unfocussed first
chapter of the Sanskrit is so unmistakably composed of discrete sections that we must
suspect careless editing some time before the extant manuscripts came into being.”220
TRANSLATION
§89. If [the following objection] were [brought forth by Dignāga]:
Exactly this worldly practice regarding means of valid cognition and
the object cognized (pramāṇaprameyavyavahāra) has been described
by us with [our] treatise (śāstra),437
[we would reply:] Then the advantage (phala) of its description
should be stated.
§90. [Opponent:] It [i.e., worldly practice regarding means of valid
cognition and the object cognized] has been ruined by poor logicians
(kutārkika) through [their] assertion of an erroneous characteristic
He therefore considers the "sections" of the PsP up to the present paragraph “to have
been, at one time, an introductory chapter in their own right" and separates the
refutation of the views of the opponent (“either Dignāga or Bhāvaviveka") which
follow as Chapter II of his translation, setting off “the normal commentary on
Nāgārjuna's kārikās concerned with causal conditions" as Chapter III. It is certainly
an exaggeration to call the chapter "unfocussed," and to blame the chapter's length
and the perceived lack of focus on "careless editing" is too cavalier. Rather than
breaking the chapter into three parts, it may be more prudent to merely be aware that
revision appears to have taken place. Felix Erb (1997: 7) comments on the "gross[e]
Freiheit des Kommentarstils Candrakīrtis" in his introduction to his translation of the
ŚSV, stating that in his commentary on the first two kārikās of the ŚSV, Candrakīrti
takes advantage of Nāgārjuna's choice of (the Buddha's) statements concerning the
self, non-self, etc., which Nāgārjuna uses to illustrate the nītārtha/neyārtha theory, in
order to refute the Hindu systems' ātman theory, and in particular, to refute the Hina-
yāna and Yogācāra schools', as well as Bhāviveka's, views of sūnyatā. The result is
that the commentary on the first two kārikās takes up a quarter of the entire ŚSV
(Candrakīrti's commentary on the first chapter of the MMK makes up approximately
one sixth of the PSP).
437 The treatise referred to is the Pramāṇasamuccaya. Candrakīrti cites from it in the
following discussion on direct perception. *LȚ's author identifies “us” as Dignāga,
etc.: asmābhi[r] dignāgādibhiḥ. He also notes that this assertion by Dignāga, etc., is
made in regard to the position that worldly usage in regard to means of valid
cognition and the object cognized, while not applicable on the ultimate level, is
accepted on the worldly level: laukika eva pramāṇaprameyavyavahāro yukto na
pāramārthika ity asmin pakṣa (ms: pakṣe) āha | (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 124, 142 [fol.
2b4]). See also Siderits 1981: 130f. On Dignāga's affiliation with the Yogācāra
school and the development of his ideas and argumentation in regard to the ultimate
non-existence of external things, see Frauwallner 1959; cf. also Dreyfus and Lindtner
1989; Tosaki 1987. Cf. Steinkellner 1990 on Dharmakīrti's ultimate view, as well as,
e.g., Dunne 2004: 53ff.438
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
221
(laksana). We have stated its (= pramāṇa and prameya's) correct
characteristic. 439
438 The "poor logicians" spoken of by the opponent are considered by most scholars
to be the Naiyāyikas (cf., e.g., Stcherbatsky 1927: 140; Sprung 1979: 53, n. 2;
Siderits 1981: 127; Arnold 2005a: 151). According to Tillemans (1990: 39, n. 89),
the kutārkikas are other philosophers "such as the Naiyāyikas"; he refers exclusively
to the Naiyāyikas in his next sentence (“In other words, the only justification for the
Epistemologist's program would be if the Naiyāyika account of worldly truth was
inadequate, but, argues Candrakīrti, such is not the case" [the sentence quoted is on
p. 40]). The majority of scholars who claim that the Naiyāyikas are the adversaries
criticized base their judgement on the fact that Candrakīrti later on in this PSP
chapter (PSPM §119-§122 [PSP₁ 75.2-8]) defends a four-pramāṇa system (versus
Dignāga's two-pramāṇa system), asseverating that direct perception (pratyakṣa),
inference (anumāna), authoritative testimony (āgama) and comparison (upamāna)
are to be accepted on the surface level. While it is true that these four correspond to
the pramāṇas of the Nyaya school, I expect that Candrakīrti's Dignāga is making a
general statement here and doubt that it should be connected with Candrakīrti's four-
pramāṇa presentation; in addition to the epistemological theories of the Naiyāyikas,
Dignāga refutes those of the Vaiśeṣikas, Sānkhyas and Mīmāmsakas (and that of the
Vādavidhi) in his PS. It can further be noted that the *Upayahṛdaya documents that
*pratyakṣa, *anumāna, *āgama/śabda/āptaśruti and *upamāna were posited within
the Buddhist fold for a strand of the pre-(and parallel?)Vasubandhu-pre-Dignāga
tradition: atha katividham pramāṇam | caturvidham pramāṇam | pratyakṣam
anumānam upamānam āgamaś ceti (reconstructed from Chinese by Tucci; cf. Tucci
1981: 13. See also Kajiyama 1991: 109 and Nagasaki 1991: 221). I therefore hesitate
to assert that Candrakīrti intends to defend specifically (or exclusively) the Nyāya
pramāṇas. For the descriptions/definitions of the four pramāṇas provided by
Candrakīrti, see PSPM §119-§122 (PSP₁ 75.2-8); for disparities between these
definitions and the Naiyāyika definitions, see n. 541. The same four pramāṇas are
listed and refuted in the VV (Lindtner [1982b: 70, n. 110] is of the opinion that the
opponent in the VV is a Buddhist, and gives as one of his reasons the fact that the
third pramāṇa is designated āgama in the VV, not sabda as it is more commonly, but
not exclusively, designated in Nyāya works). Dignāga asserts in the NM that sabda,
upamāna and so forth are not separate means of valid cognition, because they are
included in pratyakṣa and anumāna; cf. Tucci 1930: 50; Katsura 1982: 82. On the
pramāṇas accepted by other schools, see Hattori 1968: 78, n. 1.12.
439
It would seem that in the present context the term lakṣaṇa refers primarily to the
essential characteristic of pramāṇaprameyavyavahāra, but secondarily to the words
that formulate and express this characteristic. lakṣaṇa as the verbally formulated
specification of the existential characteristic may thus secondarily intend a definition.
It can probably be assumed that the correct characterization of pramāṇaprameya-
vyavahāra depends above all on the correct characterization, and thus also the222
TRANSLATION
[Reply:] This too is not reasonable. For if, caused by [the fact that
these] poor logicians have adduced an erroneous characteristic, the
world would be mistaken in regard to the object characterized
(lakṣya),440 [then] for its (= the world's) sake [your] endeavour (pra-
yatna) would be advantageous-but this is not the case (i.e., that
worldly practice has been detrimentally affected by the assertions of
these logicians).4¹ Thus, this endeavour [of yours to provide a so-
called corrected account of the matter] is simply pointless.442
correctly formulated definitions, of pramāṇa and prameya, of which the characteriza-
tion and definition of pramāṇa would be primary.
440 *LȚ's author exemplifies lakṣya of the compound lakṣyavaiparītyam, i.e., what
might be misunderstood if the world were mistaken in regard to the object charac-
terized: lakṣye dhūmād vahnipratītau (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 124, 142 [fol. 2b4]).
441
I follow Ms B's and PsP Tib's text and thus read yadi hi kutārkikair viparīta-
lakṣaṇapraṇayanakṛtam laksyavaiparītyam lokasya syāt instead of PsP₁² 's vipa-
rītalakṣaṇapraṇayanam kṛtam
syāt; that is, I read the sentence up to lokasya syāt
as a single conditional phrase. PsP Tib reads: gal te 'jig rten la rtog ge ngan pas
mtshan nyid phyin ci log brjod pas byas pa’i mtshon bya phyin ci log yod par 'gyur na
ni .... Were the text with the anusvāra to be correct, one would expect, given the
syāt after lokasya, a syāt after kṛtam. Ms P’s and ms Q's anusvāra may have been
passed on to them by ms , unless it was already in ms ß and ms B's lack of it merely
represents a scribal omission. Vaidya (1960b: 20) emends de La Vallée Poussin's
text in his own edition by appropriating (without reference!) de La Vallée Poussin's
reconstruction (PSP₁ 59, n. 2) of PsP Tib's brjod pas byas pa as ᵒpraṇayanāt kṛtam.
Candrakīrti responds to Dignāga's justification for composing his treatise by saying
that if the "poor" logicians have misled the world by giving a wrong characterization,
thereby causing it to deal with the objects of the world in a confused and self-
detrimental way, then Dignāga's setting forth of a corrected presentation could be of
value inasmuch as the world could then rely on it. However, he continues, the world
has not been misled by the conclusions of these logicians. Implicit in the response is
the idea that logicians' statements on means of cognition, etc., be they correct or
incorrect, have little relevance for the everyday world; the world relies on its own
consensually established understanding of prameya and pramāṇa.
mere de-
44² Tillemans (1990: 39, n. 89), referring to PsP₁ 58.14-59.3 (PsPM §89-§90), argues
that Candrakīrti aims to "characterize the Epistemologist's program as
scription of worldly truth,” a program the Epistemologist considers justified because
philosophers like the Naiyāyikas have bungled their own descriptions. Tillemans
remarks, "In fact, this is a somewhat too facile and inaccurate characterization of
what the Epistemologist is up to and blurs the fact of his reductionism: he is not
trying to do a better inventory of the worlds' (sic) notions, he is explaining and criti-223
§91. Moreover, the fault [as regards your view] has been assigned in
the Vigrahavyāvartanī through statements such as "If apprehension of
the object cognized (prameyādhigama) is dependent on means of
valid cognition (pramāṇādhīna), by what are those means of valid
cognition determined?"443 Since [you] have not refuted that [fault,
you] do not clarify, for its part, the correct characteristic.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
cizing them by reducing unrealities to more ontologically fundamental elements."
Candrakīrti is, however, very aware of the Epistemologist's reductionist program,
but is commencing his argumentation with an allusion to his own stance that Bud-
dhist philosophers, when dealing with the samvṛti level, should undertake no more
than a description of worldly things and concepts. While it is true that at this point he
has Dignāga professing to do only this, with this first step Candrakīrti shows that any
presentation that aims to correct the world-which is finding and working with its
objects unproblematically will have no impact on it (see previous note). He will in
the following harshly critique Dignāga for bringing his reductionism into play on the
everyday level, since analysis has no place on this level and in fact can have only
detrimental effects.
443 Candrakīrti now argues that even though Dignāga claims to have provided the
correct characteristic, he has failed to do so, since he has not answered the critical
question of how the pramāṇas are ascertained.
The citation that Candrakīrti states derives from the VV is not found in these words
in the VV as it has been transmitted to us; it is also not in verse. It appears that
Candrakīrti is making reference to and re-phrasing VV 31 to reflect the discourse of
the Epistemologist. VV 31 reads: yadi ca pramāṇatas te teṣām teṣām prasiddhir
arthānām | teṣām punaḥ prasiddhim brūhi katham te pramāṇānām || (de La Vallée
Poussin paraphrases the verse at PsP₁ 59, n. 3). The author of the VV poses the
question for the sake of refuting the view that means of valid cognition exist
ultimately. It is, however, acceptable for Madhyamikas to speak of surface level
prameyas and pramāṇas, but they must be understood as existing in mutual depend-
ence; it is not correct to speak of only one of the pair as being established by the
other. Candrakīrti is using the paraphrased VV kārikā to reject Dignāga’s position on
pramāṇa and prameya on the surface level. Hattori (1968: 76, n. 1.10), referring to
Dignāga's Yogācāra affiliation, asserts that Dignāga's "theory does not conflict with
Nāgārjuna's argument against the substantiality of pramāṇa and prameya." He adds
that “a later extreme transcendentalist, Candrakīrti, makes an attack on Dignāga's
proposition 'pramāṇādhīnaḥ prameyādhigamaḥ,' asserting that there is nothing to be
apprehended in the ultimate sense; see Prasannap. p. 58.14ff., but this criticism does
not fundamentally affect Dignāga's standpoint." On the contrary, Candrakīrti's focus
in this discussion is not the nature of the pramāṇas and prameyas on the ultimate
level, but rather Dignāga's fault-ridden presentation of them on the worldly level.
Candrakīrti will next take as his target just one of the prameyas, the particular
characteristic (the general characteristic, conceptualized on the basis on the particular224
TRANSLATION
§92. Furthermore, if in conformity with the pair of characteristics,
namely, the particular and the general (svasāmānyalakṣaṇa), a pair of
means of valid cognition is asserted, does the object characterized
(lakṣya), of which these two characteristics [constitute its charac-
teristics], exist or not?444 If it exists, then, since an object of cognition
(prameya) other than those [two characteristics] exists, why [is there
only] a pair of means of valid cognition? But if an object
characterized does not exist, then the characteristic too, [being]
characteristic, can be left aside), because its refutation serves to invalidate Dignāga’s
view of direct perception, one of his primary interests in the following long debate.
444 Dignāga's two means of valid cognition, namely, direct perception (pratyakṣa)
and inference (anumāna), respectively have as object the particular characteristic
(svalakṣaṇa) and the general characteristic (sāmānyalakṣaṇa). Cf. PS I.1: pratyakṣam
anumānam ca pramāṇe lakṣaṇadvayam | prameyam (Sanskrit in Hattori 1968: 76, n.
1.11 and Appendix, and Steinkellner 2005: 1; Tib in Hattori 1968: 176f.; translation
p. 24). The svavṛtti to PS I.1 reads: na hi svasāmānyalakṣaṇābhyām anyat prameyam
asti svalakṣaṇaviṣayam ca pratyakṣam sāmānyalakṣaṇaviṣayam anumānam iti prati-
pādayiṣyāmaḥ | (Hattori 1968: 79, n. 1.14 and Steinkellner 2005: 1). According to
Dignāga, the svalakṣaṇa is the particular, inexpressible (avyapadeśya; cf. the svavṛtti
to PS I.2cd) perceptible, which is apprehended without conceptual overlay (kalpanā
is described in PS I.3d as nāmajāṭyādiyojanā, i.e., that “which has an association with
name, genus and so forth,” see Hattori 1968: 82, n. 1.25 and 83, n. 1.27.) or, as Tille-
mans (1990: 39, n. 89) puts it, “what one really sees in direct perception – all the rest
is mental fabrication coming from conceptualizing." The sāmānyalakṣaṇa is
conceptually constructed through generalizing from many individuals; the svalakṣaṇa
is real, the sāmānyalakṣaṇa not. Dharmakīrti thus asserts "but what is [really]
cognized is the particular characteristic alone” (PV III.53cd: meyam tv ekam sva-
lakṣaṇam). Hattori (1968: 80), making reference to PV III.54cd (tasya svapara-
rūpābhyām gater meyadvayam matam), writes: "That there are two sorts of prameya
implies that sva-lakṣaṇa is apprehended in two ways, as it is (sva-rūpeṇa) and as
something other than itself (para-rūpeņa), but not that there is real sāmānya apart
from sva-lakṣaṇa. Thus, the distinction between sva-lakṣaṇa and sāmānya-lakṣaṇa is
the result of a changed perspective." On svalakṣaṇa and sāmānyalakṣaṇa, and
Dharmakīrti's characterization of them, see, e.g., Hattori 1968: 79, n. 1.14; Tillemans
1990: 273, n. 366; Dunne 2004: 79ff. Dignāga denies that a third pramāṇa is required
for cognizing things such colour, etc., as impermanent or for cases of recognition (cf.
PS I.2cd-3b; Hattori 1968: 24f.).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
225
without a basis (āśraya), does not exist; thus, how [can you maintain]
a pair of means of valid cognition?445 For he [= Nāgārjuna] will say:
And when there is not the proceeding of a characteristic, an
object characterized is not logically possible;
And when an object characterized is not logically possible, a
characteristic as well is impossible.440
445 Candrakīrti commences his attack on Dignāga's view that there are two means of
valid cognition (pramāṇa) by pointing out that when these two means of valid cogni-
tion, namely, direct perception and inference (= pramāṇa #1 and #2) respectively and
restrictively take as object the two characteristics, i.e., the particular and the general
(= prameya #1 and #2), Dignāga is obliged to consider what is characterized (lakṣya)
by them. Implicit in Candrakīrti's argument is the assumption that a lakṣaṇa cannot
exist without a lakṣya: if Dignāga agrees that a lakṣya, i.e., a basis for the lakṣaṇas,
exists, then a third pramāṇa, i.e., one that perceives the lakṣya (= prameya #3), will
be have to be admitted (*LȚ's author notes that lakṣyam should be understood as
prameyam; cf. Yonezawa 2004: 124, 142 [fol. 2b4]); but if Dignāga rejects the exis-
tence of a lakṣya where the lakṣaṇas come to appear or, so to speak, take their foot-
hold, then the lakṣaṇas will be without a basis. lakṣaṇas without a basis, i.e., not
characterizing anything, cannot exist, and thus cannot serve as objects of cognition.
The two means of valid cognition are therefore impossible. MMK V.4 is subsequent-
ly cited by Candrakīrti to support this second argument.
Arnold (2005b: 427, n. 51) criticizes Seyfort Ruegg's translation of lakṣya in the
present paragraph as “characterized definiendum.” I agree that definitions and the
objects they define are not immediately relevant, but, as I indicated earlier, the ideas
"characteristic" and "definition" are closely connected and often interwoven, a defi-
nition being nothing more than the verbal formulation of a characteristic. Arnold
(ibid.) also criticizes Seyfort Ruegg's translation of svalakṣaṇa as “particular char-
acteristic" inasmuch as he considers that it suggests, against Dignāga's understanding
and intent, that such characteristics characterize something else; he translates the
word as “unique particular.” I acknowledge that the word bears this meaning in
Dignāga's epistemology but retain the translation “particular characteristic" because
Candrakīrti's argumentation focusses on its being exactly this. That Candrakīrti here
and in the following discussion takes the implications of Dignāga's svalakṣaṇa as
"characteristic" as focal point does not, however, mean that he is merely bickering
about word choices and ignoring or overlooking Dignāga's conception of svalakṣaṇa.
As will be seen in the following, Candrakīrti deals with the meaning and implication
of the word as "characteristic" in order to show just how inappropriate it is for a
Mahāyānist to posit unique particulars on the surface level.
446 MMK V.4: lakṣanāsampravṛttau ca na lakṣyam upapadyate | lakṣyasyānupapattau
ca lakṣaṇasyāpy asambhavaḥ ||. Nāgārjuna has argued in MMK V.2ab that no thing
without a characteristic exists anywhere (alakṣaṇo na kaścic ca bhāvaḥ samvidyate
kvacit); there is nothing existing in an indefinite, murky state which only subsequent-226
§93. If there were [the following objection from the side of the
Epistemologist:] It is not a characteristic (lakṣaṇa) because [some-
thing, i.e., a lakṣya] is characterized by it (lakṣyate anena). Rather,
taking the [affix] lyuṭ (= ana) [of the word lakṣaṇa] in [its function of
denoting] the object (karman) [on the basis of the grammatical rule:]
"Secondary affixes and lyut affixes [are allowed to occur] variously"
(krtyalyuto bahulam),447 [we maintain that it is] a characteristic (la-
TRANSLATION
ly attains delineation and distinctiveness through the application of a characteristic.
When things without any characteristic do not exist, there is nowhere for a
characteristic to apply itself, to "set foot" (MMK V.2cd: asaty alakṣaṇe bhāve
kramatām kuha lakṣaṇam). A characteristic is also not admissible when a thing is
already endowed with its characteristic (salakṣaṇa), for such a thing does not need to
be characterized again, and no third thing, i.e., something other than an alakṣaṇa or
salakṣaṇa thing, exists (MMK V.3). Thus, when a characteristic has, so to speak,
nowhere to go, no fundament in which to appear or constitute itself, a thing
characterized (lakṣya) is impossible, for a lakṣya is defined by a lakṣaṇa; the
characteristic must be able to apply itself to something in order to make this a
characterized thing. And when a thing characterized is impossible, so too a
characteristic, for a characteristic is only such in relation to the thing it characterizes
(MMK V.4); note that Candrakīrti in his commentary on MMK V.4cd, as in his
argumentation here against a non-existing lakṣya, grounds the argumentation in the
pāda with the statement that the characteristic would be without a basis (nirāśraya).
Garfield's translation of these verses is unreliable. Garfield (1995: 14, 150) translates
MMK V.2 as "A thing without a characteristic [h]as never existed. If nothing lacks a
characteristic, [w]here do characteristics come to be?" (the translation in Samten and
Garfield 2006 retains the mistakes) and comments (150): "So we can conclude that
everything has characteristics." Unfortunately, his interpretation of the entire chapter
is flawed, failing to reflect Nāgārjuna's intent.
447 Candrakīrti allows Dignāga to defend his theory of the two characteristics by way
of a grammatical argument. According to hypothetical Dignāga, the word
"characteristic" (lakṣaṇa) as used in his system does not denote an instrument
(karaṇa), but rather an object (karman) and as such it is unaffected by Candrakīrti's
contention applicable only to "characteristic" as an instrument that a
characteristic, as a “characterizer," i.e., that by which something is characterized,
requires a thing characterized (lakṣya). Dignāga's defense finds legitimation in the
grammatical rule that allows the affix "ana" termed lyut in the Pāṇinian
system more than one function. As Candrakīrti's interpretation of the word lakṣaṇa
reflects, this affix may have the function of denoting the instrument (he will state that
the word is commonly accepted as derived in an instrumental sense); this function,
along with an alternative function of denoting the location, is expressed in Pā
3.3.117: karaṇādhikaraṇayoś ca "[The affix lyuṭ denotes] the instrument or locus."PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
227
kṣaṇa) because that [characteristic itself] is characterized (lakṣyate
tat).
[Reply:] Even so, because the instrument (karaṇa) by which that
[characteristic] is characterized [has to be] something different
(arthantara) from the object (karman) since something cannot be
characterized by itself, precisely that fault [remains, i.e., that the
characteristic cannot exist because it cannot stand alone, in this case,
without something characterizing it].ª
448
The Kāś slightly expands: karaṇe 'dhikaraṇe ca kārake dhātor lyuṭ pratyayo bhavati
"The affix lyut occurs after a root in [the function of denoting] a kāraka as an instru-
ment or locus"; among the examples provided by the Kāś are idhmapravraścana, an
axe, that is, an instrument (karaṇa) for cutting wood, and godohanī, a milk-pail, that
is, a receptacle (adhikaraṇa) into which milk is milked. Pā 3.3.115 (lyuṭ ca) further
authorizes usage of the affix lyut to form verbal nouns (Kāś provides, among others,
the examples hasana "laughing" and jalpana "chattering"). The rule that Dignāga
avails himself of to substantiate his interpretation of lakṣaṇa as object (karman) is Pā
3.3.113: krtyalyuto bahulam (my translation is based on Cardona's [1988: 233]; cf.
also Böthlingk [2001: 126]: “Die kṛtja genannten Suffixe und das Suffix ana haben
häufig andere Bedeutungen als diejenigen, die ihnen zugetheilt wurden”). The Kāś
comments: kṛtyasamjñakāḥ pratyayā lyuṭ ca bahulam artheṣu bhavanti karanādhi-
karaṇayoḥ bhāve ca lyuṭ | anyatrāpi bhavati “The affixes termed kṛtya and lyuṭ occur
in various senses. ...
lyut [is applied] in [denoting] an instrument [or] locus and [to
form] a verbal noun [but] it occurs [denoting] other [grammatical forms] as well."
Cardona (1988: 233) illustrates Pā 3.3.113 as it pertains to lyuṭ with the verb √bhuj:
"Again, bhojana, with lyut after bhuj, can signify not only eating but also an object
that is eaten, food." Thus on this interpretation, Dignāga's lakṣya-like lakṣaṇa will
not require a lakṣya.
See also the reference to Pa 3.3.113 in the MABh (MABhed 261.9: krit dang luț ni
phal cher) which occurs in the course of Candrakīrti’s refutation of the Buddhist
opponent's view that ātman, the appropriator (upādātṛ), which is claimed to be no-
thing more than the composite of the skandhas, i.e., what is appropriated (upādāna),
does not exist (cf. MABhed 260.12-261.14; MABh 1911: 306).
448
lakṣaṇa understood as having a lyuṭ affix in its function of denoting the object
would have to be characterized by something, and that which characterizes is a lakṣa-
ṇa, the latter in its function of instrument. The single object-lakṣaṇa cannot addition-
ally be an instrument, cannot self-characterize, and when it is not characterized it is
incapable of existing as an object-lakṣaṇa. That things cannot act on themselves is an
argument used by Candrakīrti in various contexts, and one he will apply in the up-
coming refutation of self-cognition. Cf., e.g., the argument in his commentary on
MMK II.2 against the visual faculty seeing itself: tatra tad eva darśanam svātmānam
na paśyati svātmani kriyāvirodhāt | (PsP₁ 114.1).228
TRANSLATION
§94. If it were [argued:] This is not a fault, because cognition (jñāna)
is an instrument and because it is included as a particular characteris-
tic (svalakṣaṇa).44⁹
Reply: According to general agreement (iha), the individual (ātmīya)
own form (svarūpa) of things not common to other [things] (anyāsā-
dhāraṇa) is the particular characteristic (svalakṣaṇa), for example,
earth's solidity (kāṭhinya), feeling's (vedanā) experience (anubhava),
consciousness' (vijñāna) awareness of the respective object (viṣayam
prati vijñaptiḥ) 450 considering that (iti kṛtvā) [the entity] which pos-
449 Dignāga responds to Candrakīrti's demand by asserting that there is also a sva-
lakṣana-cum-lakṣaṇa which is capable of performing the function of an instrument
(karaṇa), and as an instrumental particular characteristic it characterizes the particu-
lar characteristic considered by him to have the function of karman. Thus the particu-
lar-characteristic-cum-object indeed has a characteristic characterizing it, and,
inasmuch as this characteristic is the separate entity known as cognition, the
instrument (karaṇa) is indeed something other than the object (karman). As Siderits
(1981: 133f.) remarks, with the stress laid on cognition being itself a particular
characteristic, "the opponent is seeking to meet the objection that lakṣaṇa and lakṣya
must be thought of as distinct without admitting to his ontology anything other
than the unique svalakṣaṇa."
It would seem that Dignāga’s response also takes into consideration another nuance
of the verb √laks, namely, √laks in the sense of "to perceive," intending with it sup-
port for his view: the svalakṣaṇa as object perceived (karman) is perceived by the
instrument (karaṇa) perception (jñāna).
450
The examples Candrakīrti provides are found in the AK and AKBh. AKBhed 8.19
(= AKBh¡ 12.15) leads into AK I.12d's listing of the own nature of the four elements
with: svabhāvas tu yathākramaḥ. AK I.12d: kharasnehoṣṇateraṇāḥ (AKBhed 8.21
[=AKBhµj 12.17]: kharaḥ pṛthivīdhātuḥ). AKBh ad AK I.12ab: ete catvāraḥ
svalakṣaṇopādāyarūpadhāraṇād dhātavaś catvāri mahābhūtāny ucyante (AKBhed
8.13 [= AKBhĒj 12.6-7]) “These four dhātus, [so named] because [they] bear their
own [particular] characteristic and [bear] secondary matter, are called the four great
elements"; AKVy 32.33-33.2: svalakṣaṇopādāyarūpadhāraṇād dhātava iti kāṭhi-
nyādisvalakṣaṇam cakṣurādyupādāyarūpam ca dadhātīti (read: dadhatīti) dhātavaḥ
(cf. MW s.v.√dhā: bear, hold, support). Further references to kāṭhinya as the parti-
cular characteristic of earth are given by de La Vallée Poussin at PsP₁ 60, n. 5. Cf.
also AK I.14c: vedanā nubhavaḥ; AK I.14d: samjñā nimittodgrahaṇātmikā; AK
I.16a: vijñānam prativijñaptiḥ (AKBh ad I.16a: visayam viṣayam prati vijñaptir
upalabdhir vijñānaskandha ity ucyate [AKBhed 11.7 = AKBhµ¡ 17.7]; AKVy ad I.16a
[38.23f.]: vijñānaskandhaḥ prativijñaptir ity arthaḥ skandhādhikārāt. pratir
vīpsārthaḥ. viṣayam viṣayam pratīty arthaḥ. upalabdhir vastumātragrahaṇam. Cf.
also AKBhed 108.11-12, where the first two of the three types of mental attention229
sesses that [characteristic] (tadvān) is naturally (hi) characterized by
that [characteristic]. But [he who] (= Dignāga), having rejected the
derivation (vyutpatti) [of the word laksana] which conforms with
what is generally acknowledged (prasiddhi), maintains45¹ [that lakṣa-
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
[manaskāra] are given as svalakṣaṇamanaskāraḥ and sāmānyalakṣaṇamanaskāraḥ
[AKBh II.325]). Candrakīrti lists the respective lakṣaṇas of the five skandhas at
PSP₁ 343.9: rūpaṇānubhavanimittodgrahaṇābhisamskaraṇaviṣayaprativijñaptilakṣa-
ṇāḥ pañcaskandhāḥ. Erb (1997: 166, n. 656) notes, “Schliesslich unterscheidet Ca
zwei Arten von Merkmalen der Daseinsfaktoren: Die spezifischen Wesensmerkmale
(svalakṣaṇa), wie die Festigkeit usw. als spezifisches Wesensmerkmal der Elemente
Erde usw. (s. Pras 126,1), und die allgemeinen Merkmale der dharma, womit meist
die allgemeinen Wesensmerkmale des Verursachten (sāmanya-samskṛta-lakṣaṇa
[read: sāmānyaᵒ]) Entstehen, Bestehen und Vergehen (vgl. 7. parīkṣā in der Pras)
gemeint sind." Candrakīrti further refers to an interpretation of sāmānyalakṣaṇa in
his commentary on MMK XV.1ab in which anityatva and so forth are referred to as
sāmānyalakṣaṇas: evam ... bālā
lakṣaṇam ācakṣate agner auṣṇyam svalakṣaṇam
tato 'nyatrānupalambhād asādhāraṇatvena svam eva lakṣaṇam iti kṛtvā | bālajana-
prasiddhyaiva ca bhagavatā tad evaiṣām sāmvṛtam svarūpam abhidharme vyava-
sthāpitam | sādhāraṇam tv anityatvādikam sāmānyalakṣaṇam iti coktam (PsP₁ 261.3-
7; presumably meant are anitya, duḥkha, and anātman, or anitya, śūnya and
anātman). See also de Jong 1949: 4, n. 14.
451 De La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 60.6-7), relying on his three manuscripts and PsP Tib,
edited the passage to read: vijñānasya viṣayaprativijñaptiḥ (half-daṇḍa) tena hi tal
lakṣyata iti kṛtvā prasiddhānugatām ca vyutpattim avadhūya karmasādhanam
abhyupagacchati | vijñānasya ca ... . Stcherbatsky (1927: 143, n. 4) considers the iti
kṛtvā phrase as belonging to the Madhyamika's statement, and thus asserts that a full
danda needs to be placed after iti kṛtvā. Stcherbatsky's assigning of the iti kṛtvā
phrase to the Madhyamaka side is of course correct (cf. also Seyfort Ruegg 2002:
106), for the Madhyamika justifies his stance regarding (sva)lakṣaṇas as instruments
via this statement. Vaidya (1960b: 20.30) adopts de La Vallée Poussin's text for his
edition, but he sets, in place of de La Vallée Poussin's half-daṇḍa, a full daṇḍa after
PsP's viṣayaprativijñaptiḥ (I accept the manuscript reading viṣayam prati vijñaptiḥ)
thereby assigning the iti kṛtvā phrase to the sentence describing the opponent's view
on the word lakṣaṇa; Siderits' translation (cf. 1981: 134), which is based on Vaidya's
edition, has been influenced by the latter's punctuation. Dan Arnold (2005b: 430, n.
64) notes that there are problems with de La Vallée Poussin's text, even mentioning
that emending abhyupagacchati to abhyupagacchatā would make the passage clearer,
but he (reluctantly) accepts tena in the meaning of “therefore" and takes the ca
following prasiddhānugatām, which is intended as an adversative, as a continuative,
so that he construes, like Vaidya and Siderits, the iti kṛtvā phrase with the description
of the Epistemologist's slant on things; he translates (ibid., 429) “... Therefore,
taking [svalakṣaṇa] in the sense of ‘what is characterized,' and [thus] disregarding
the etymology that follows the familiar sense, [our interlocutor] takes it as denoting
66230
na is used in the sense of] denoting the object (karmasādhana),452 and
[further] regards consciousness (vijñāna) as the instrument (karaṇa),
ends up asserting this, [namely, that] the particular characteristic
(svalakṣaṇa) itself is the object (karman) and [that] another particular
characteristic is the instrument (karaṇa). As concerns this, if the
particular characteristic consciousness is the instrument, there has to
be a separate object (karman) for it (i.e., for consciousness), [and
since you have not asserted one,] just that fault [i.e., that the
characteristic cannot exist because it will stand alone, without that
which it characterizes, remains].453
TRANSLATION
an object. And by positing [at the same time] ... ." The sense of the iti kṛtvā phrase
was of course obfuscated by de La Vallée Poussin's PsP Tib-based (des de mtshon
par byed pas) emendation of his manuscripts' reading tena hi tadvāna lakṣyate to
tena hi tal lakṣyate. None of the manuscripts attest a danda after viṣayam prati
vijñaptiḥ (or after iti kṛtvā, for that matter) and both mss P and D (Q is not available
for this section) attest the instrumental present active participle abhyupagacchatā in
place of de La Vallée Poussin's abhyupagacchati. The uncorrupted textual tradition
thus understood the instrumental participles abhyupagacchatā and pratipadyamānena
as signaling the logical subject for the second sentence. De La Vallée Poussin's
abhyupagacchati, it might be noted, is bereft of a subject.
452 The compound karmasādhana is a technical term of the grammatical tradition
which, when used in reference to a word as whole, indicates that the word referred
to is derived in its passive, or object-denoting, sense, as opposed to being derived in
its active sense (bhāvasādhana). Renou (1957: 125) translates karmasādhana as “qui
a l'objet-transitif (i.e. une notion passive) pour mode de réalisation,” bhāvasādhana
as "qui a pour mode de réalisation la production (d'un phénomène nouveau).” Cf.,
e.g., Patañjali's Bhāṣya to Pā 1.1.58, where the two senses of the word vidhi are
glossed as vidhiyate, “that which is taught/enjoined,” i.e., vidhi in its object-denoting
sense, and vidhāna, “the teaching/enjoining (of something),” i.e., vidhi in its active
sense (ayam ca vidhiśabdo 'sty eva karmasādhano vidhīyate vidhir iti | asti bhāva-
sādhano vidhānam vidhir iti; translated and discussed in Filliozat 1978: 127f.). The
term karmasādhana can also be used in regard to an affix, in which case it signals
that the addition of the affix effects or establishes an object-denoting sense for the
word derived; see, e.g., Patañjali's Bhāṣya to Pā 2.1.51, where the affix ghañ, added
to the root hr preceded by sam and ān is said to effect the object-denoting sense, that
is, the derived word samāhāra means samāhriyate, “what is grouped together," and
does not serve to create an action noun meaning samāharaṇa “grouping together”
(translated and discussed in Joshi and Roodbergen 1971: 6-9).
453 Candrakīrti lets it be known that the Mādhyamika accepts the Abhidharmic
position according to which svalakṣaṇa is properly understood only in its instrumen-
tal sense, as characterizing its lakṣya, that to which it is said to belong. Solidity, for
example, the essential and distinctive feature of earth, thus possessed, so to speak, byPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
231
§95. If it were [argued:] There is, indeed, an object for it [i.e., for
consciousness], namely, the solidity (kāṭhinya) and so forth pertaining
[respectively] to earth, etc., which are accessible to consciousness;
and that (= solidity, etc.) is not [something] separate from the particu-
lar characteristic (= earth, etc.).45
454
earth, characterizes earth. Dignāga, on the other hand, has claimed that he under-
stands svalakṣaṇa in its object sense, but that cognition (jñāna), also a svalakṣaṇa,
can be considered as and can perform the function of an instrument. Candrakīrti
retorts that the consequence of this view is that consciousness (vijñāna; note the
switch from the noun jñāna, commonly employed in the treatises of the Epistemolo-
gists, to its synonym vijñāna for the sake of bringing out the comparison with the
Abhidharma example), in now being claimed as an instrumental-svalakṣaṇa, will
need yet another svalakṣaṇa for its object. More precisely: according to the Ābhi-
dharmikas, the essential, basic feature of consciousness (vijñāna) is its awareness of
individual objects, and due to this, visayam prati vijñapti is considered the
(sva)lakṣaṇa of the lakṣya vijñāna. viṣayam prati vijñapti as instrumental-lakṣaṇa (=
karaṇa) thus characterizes vijñāna, its lakṣya (= karman). Dignāga, who is respond-
ing to Candrakīrti's demand for an instrument which would characterize his object-
denoting svalakṣaṇa, states that (vi)jñāna can serve as this karaṇa. However, argues
Candrakīrti, if (vi)jñāna is now a karaṇa instead of a lakṣya/karman, i.e., if it
assumes the function allotted by the Ābhidharmikas to viṣayam prati vijñapti, then
(vi)jñāna will have to have—like the Ābhidharmikas’ viṣayam prati vijñapti does—a
lakṣya, that is, it will have to be assigned a lakṣya, and this lakṣya cannot again be
(vi)jñāna. If it doesn't have a lakṣya, then it stands alone, and a lakṣaṇa without a
lakṣya is not acceptable.
Dan Arnold (2005a: 154f.; 2005b: 432, n. 66) is of the view that the fault (dosa)
Candrakīrti sees in Dignāga's position is one of infinite regress. Candrakīrti will
point out in his next reply that Dignāga's positing of a svalakṣaṇa which functions as
both a karaṇa and karman will involve infinite regress, but in the present response he
is merely reiterating the problem he indicated at the beginning of the discussion
about (sva)lakṣaṇas, namely, that they cannot stand alone.
454
Dignāga responds to the demand for a separate object-svalakṣaṇa by asserting that
the solidity of earth and so forth are consciousness' object, and attempts to avoid
further criticism by pointing out that this solidity is not related to earth as the Ābhi-
dharmikas (and Candrakīrti, at least as regards the samvṛti level) understand it to be,
i.e., as an instrumental-svalakṣaṇa, but merely represents the nature of earth and is
thus nothing other than earth.
The Buddhists of the Conservative schools were the heirs and developers of an anti-
substantialist or anti-foundationalist line of thought—the beginnings of which, quite
possibly inspired by the historical Buddha himself, can be found in early
Buddhism—that emphasized the fleeting, evanescent nature of things. Attention was
thus intentionally diverted away from the idea of a firm and enduring core of232
TRANSLATION
[Reply:] Then, it being so, because the particular characteristic con-
sciousness is not an object (karman), [consciousness] would not be an
object of cognition (prameya), since only the particular characteristic
that has the form of the object (karmarūpa) is an object of cognition.
And therefore, this [tenet of yours] that the object of cognition
(prameya) is of two types, [viz.] the particular characteristic (sva-
lakṣaṇa) and the general characteristic (sāmānyalakṣaṇa), has to be
[re]formulated after it has been qualified (visesya) [with the
following]: "A certain particular characteristic, which is intended
thus [i.e., 'it] is characterized' (lakṣyate), is an object of cognition
(prameya), [and] a certain [other particular characteristic], which is
intended [in the sense of] 'it characterizes' (lakṣyate 'nena), is not an
object of cognition (aprameya)."455 But if that [latter sort of particular
persons, such as an ātman, and from concepts of a bearer of the qualities of things,
and as a result, qualities came to be viewed as the sole existing entities. Within the
category of matter (rūpa), odour, for example, held in non-Buddhist schools to be the
quality (guna) of the substance (dravya) earth, was, so to speak, “liberated" from
earth and set off as an independent entity, and earth was identified with its nature of
solidity; earth as solidity as well as odour were afforded the status of fundamental
elements of the inner and outer world (see the discussion of the Buddhist theory of
atoms in Frauwallner 1958: 96-100). However, the conventional distinguishing of
characteristic and object characterized was still applied by the scholastics in regard
to, e.g., the individual element-quality earth, even as they rejected the notion of
substance as posited by the non-Buddhists. As pointed out in the previous paragraph
by Candrakīrti, who is following, as he states, general consensus, the individual own-
form of an object that is not common to other things is considered this object's
particular characteristic.
Stcherbatsky (1927: 144) interprets Dignāga's response, as he did his previous
response, to be from the point of view of the theory of the object's aspect appearing
in consciousness and thus interprets svalakṣaṇa of svalakṣaṇāvyatirikta to be
referring to consciousness. The ākāra-theory is, however, not relevant here, and
Candrakīrti has demanded a separate object for consciousness; were svalakṣaṇāvya-
tirikta intended as Stcherbatsky interprets it, one would expect a retort or remark
from Candrakīrti at some point in the following discussion. Candrakīrti does not
comment on the Epistemologist's equating of earth and solidity in his response
because he has been steering the argumention to the issue of self-cognition, but he
will return to this.
455 Dignāga's positing of consciousness as an instrument and of another, separate
lakṣaṇa as its object leads to an unwanted consequence: there would have to exist
two mutually exclusive types of svalakṣaṇas, one an object of cognition, and one notPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
233
characteristic] is also [considered as having] the sense of an object
(karmasādhana), then there will have to be a further instrument for
it but when another cognition is postulated as the instrument, the
fault of a succession without end (anisthādosa) is incurred.456
457
§96. But if you think: There is self-awareness (svasamvitti).
Therefore, given that [consciousness] is an object (karman) by virtue
an object of cognition, with the svalakṣaṇa cognition (vijñāna) falling into the latter
category.
Both Seyfort Ruegg and Arnold construe viseṣya with the foregoing (Seyfort Ruegg
2002: 107: "Therefore, it having been specified that the prameya is twofold .";
Arnold 2005b: 432: “And thus, since you have specified (ity etad viseṣya) that two
kinds of things ...”), but it seems more reasonable that the content of the qualifica-
tion indicated with the word višesya is presented in the following part of the
sentence. PsP Tib basically understands the sentence as I do, although its khyad par
'di tsam zhig brjod par bya dgos suggests that the translators read something like
*etāvad višeṣaṇam vaktavyam instead of etad viseṣya vaktavyam; PsP Tib for the sen-
tence reads: de'i phyir gzhal bya ni rnam pa gnyis te rang gi mtshan nyid dang spyi'i
mtshan nyid do zhes bya bar | rang gi mtshan nyid cung zad cig ni gzhal bya yin te |
mtshon par bya bas na zhes de ltar bsnyad pa gang yin pa'o || cung zad cig ni gzhal
bya ma yin te 'dis mtshon par byed pas na zhes brjod pa gang yin pa'o zhes khyad par
'di tsam zhig brjod par bya dgos so ||.
456 This second consciousness, imagined by the opponent as the instrument for, i.e.,
characterizing, the first consciousness characterizing the svalakṣaṇa earth, will also
have to be accepted as both an instrument and an object and will thus require a third
consciousness as its instrument, and this third instrument- and object-consciousness
will require its own instrument, and so on into infinity.
457 Dignāga and his followers, like the Sautrāntikas and Yogācāras, posit that
cognitions cognize themselves in order to explain how awareness of cognition oc-
curs; the theory of self-awareness sidesteps the problem of infinite succession entail-
ed by any theory positing awareness of cognition via yet another cognition. See PS
I.12ab: jñānāntareṇānubhave niṣṭhā tatrāpi hi smṛtiḥ (cf. Steinkellner 2005: 5;
Steinkellner et al. 2005: 84f.); Hattori (1968: 30) translates: “If a cognition were
cognized by a separate cognition, there would be an infinite regression, because there
is a recollection of this [separate cognition] too." See also the Yogācāra explanation
presented by Candrakīrti of svasamvitti as necessary for the avoidance of the fault of
anavasthā at MABhed 167.18-168.11 (MABh 1910: 350f.). Self-awareness applies to
every cognition, regardless of whether the cognition is devoid of or involves concep-
tuality. The theory of self-awareness is further used to explain the phenomenon of
memory: a person's, e.g., visual cognition of an object also involves the awareness of
the cognition of the object, and on the basis of this awareness of the cognition of the
object one can later remember the experience of the cognition and express it with the
tr234
TRANSLATION
of [its] being grasped by self-awareness, [consciousness] is indeed
included among objects of cognition (prameya),458
[we would] reply: Due to the fact that self-awareness has [already]
been refuted in extenso in the Madhyamakāvatāra,45⁹ [your contention
words, "I saw [this or that] object" (see Candrakīrti's presentation of the Yogācāra
arguments on the necessity of svasamvitti for memory at MABhed 167.11-18 and the
proving of svasamvitti from the fact of memory at 168.11-18. MABhed 167.11-17
[MABhr 1910: 350]: gang zhig mi 'dod pa des kyang gdon mi za bar rang rig pa khas
blang bar bya dgos te gzhan du na mthong ngo zhes dus phyis 'byung ba'i dran pas
yul dran pa nyid dang | ngas mthong ngo snyam du yul gyi nyams su myong ba dran
par mi 'gyur ro || ci'i phyir zhe na | dran pa ni nyams su myong ba’i yul can yin na
shes pa yang nyams su ma myong bas dran pa pa [MABhun: without pa] yod par mi
'gyur ro ||). According to Dignāga, each cognition has a dual form, namely, a subject-
ive form (svābhāsa = grāhakākāra) and an objective form (viṣayābhāsa = grāhyākā-
ra); the self-awareness is considered the result (phala) of the act of the cognition (PS
1.9a: svasamvittiḥ phalam vātra. PSV: dvayābhāsaṇ hi jñānam utpadyate svābhāsam
viṣayābhāsam ca | tasyobhayābhāsasya vijñānasya yat svasamvedanam tat phalam).
On svasamvitti, see Hattori 1968: 100ff., notes 1.60-1.80; Moriyama 2010; Kellner
2010; Keira 2004: 39-43 (= n. 75); Arnold 2010; on svasamvitti as it pertains to
mānasapratyakṣa, cf. Nagatomi 1979; on later Tibetan discussions of svasamvitti, see
Williams 1998.
458 The translators of PsP Tib have not accommodated the locative absolute phrase
and merely set forth and join the two consequences interpreted to result from the
grasping of consciousness by self-awareness (the phyir phrase) with the connective
dang: ci ste rang rig pa yod de des na rang rig pas de 'dzin pa'i phyir las nyid yin
dang | gzhal bya'’i khongs su ’du ba yod pa yin no snyam du sems na. Consciousness's
being a karman and being prameya, however, are not consequences of equal weight
in the Sanskrit sentence; the stress of this defense ought to be, as it is in the Sanskrit,
on the fact that consciousness as the opponent defines it can also be a prameya.
45⁹ The refutation of svasamvitti is found at MA VI.72-76 and in the corresponding
MABh, where its refutation serves to disprove the existence of the dependent nature
of the world (in the trisvabhāva scheme, paratantrasvabhāva), the causally connected
stream of consciousness devoid of grāhya and grāhaka posited by the Yogācāra
opponent. Candrakīrti commences his attack on dependent nature (paratantra) by
asking by what sort of consciousness the opponent knows it (MA VI.72): grāhyam
vinā grāhakatāviyuktam dvayena śūnyam paratantrarūpam yady asti kenāsya paraişi
sattām agṛhyamāṇam ca sad ity ayuktam || (Li 2012: 11; MA Tib: gal te bzung med
ʼdzin pa nyid bral zhing | gnyis kyis stong pa’i gzhan dbang dngos yod na | 'di yi yod
par gang gis shes par 'gyur | ma bzung bar yang¹ yod ces byar mi rung || ¹MABhed:
without yang; MABhed 166.6: de khyod kyis shes pa gang gis dmigs). According to
Candrakīrti, dependent nature definitely cannot perceive itself, for it is contradictory
that something acts upon itself (*svātmani kriyāvirodhāt): the blade of a knife doesPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
235
that] the particular characteristic (e.g., solidity-cum-earth) is charac-
terized by another particular characteristic (i.e., consciousness), that
[latter] further by self-awareness (svasamvitti), is not tenable. More-
over, not even that cognition (jñāna), which [according to you] is not
established as [an entity] separate from its particular characteristic,
not cut itself, the tip of a finger does not touch itself, and even a well-trained and
flexible acrobat is not able to mount his own shoulders. Subsequent to the Yogācāra
response in which it is claimed that svasamvitti is the cognizer and an inherent aspect
of cognition svasamvitti purportedly being the illumination of consciousness by
itself, comparable to a lamp which illuminates both a pot and itself simultaneously,
without entering into a state of duality—and that svasamvitti is the aspect of cogni-
tion that accounts for memory, Candrakīrti replies (MA VI.73 and respective MABh)
that memory is not caused by self-cognition, and thus cannot be used as a reason to
prove self-cognition, in the same way that one cannot infer the existence of a magical
water-producing jewel from the mere seeing of water, for even without a magical
jewel, an accumulation of water occurs as a result of rain, etc. Even if, Candrakīrti
continues (MA VI.74 and corresponding MABh), it is accepted that cognition knows
both the object and itself, it cannot be accepted that there is a cognition which
remembers them, for this remembering cognition is something other than the original
cognition that experienced the object. Just as a cognition of aversion does not
remember an earlier experience of the self-cognition of a cognition of love or the
object of this cognition of love, similarly, since a cognition arisen at a later time in
one's own continuum does not experience the earlier cognition and its object because
it is something other than that earlier cognition, like one arisen in a continuum of one
who has not known them, it would not remember them. Even if the Yogācāra
opponent argues that memory as described by his school is indeed possible because it
occurs within one continuum and in a relationship of cause and effect, Candrakīrti's
comprehensive reason “because of being other" (paratvāt) will override this qualifi-
cation too, for the later cognition which is claimed to remember is not a component
of the unique continuum of cognitions that actually experience the object, and thus
does not stand in a relationship of cause and effect; it is, in fact, other than the cogni-
tions that experience the object, like a cognition in a completely different continuum.
He closes his refutation of svasamvitti (MA VI.76 and corresponding MABh) with
the argument that the agent (kartṛ), object (karman), and action (kriyā), like a hewer,
a tree and the act of hewing, cannot exist as a single thing, and they would exist like
this in the case of dependent nature (paratantra) being known through self-cognition:
as both object to be known and knower, it would be simultaneously the karman and
the karty, and the agent's act of knowing (kriyā) would not be distinct from the agent,
i.e., the knower.
For translations of MA VI.72-76, see, e.g., MABh… 1910: 349ff.; Fenner 1983: 257ff.
(the translation and explanation are not always reliable); Huntington 1989: 166 and
respective notes. On explanations of memory in the Abhidharma schools, see, e.g.,
Cox 1988: 59-61, 67 and the essays by Cox and Jaini in Gyatso 1992.236
TRANSLATION
[namely, awareness of the respective object (visayam prati vijña-
ptiḥ)], exists in any way, given that [this characteristic] is impossible
when an object characterized (lakṣya) does not exist, since it is not
possible that a characteristic occurs without a basis (āśraya); thus
how [could] there [be] self-awareness!460
460
After referring to his argumentation against self-awareness in the MA, Candrakīrti
clinches his refutation of it by demonstrating the impossibility of the existence of a
cognition that might be said to self-cognize. Relying on Dignāga's earlier
characterization of solidity as not being something other than earth, Candrakīrti, by
way of the modifier svalakṣaṇavyatirekeṇāsiddha, calls attention to the fact that
jñāna will similarly not be something different from its characteristic (svalakṣaṇa),
viz., awareness of the respective object (viṣayam prati vijñaptiḥ). Dignāga maintains
that the object (karman) in the case of self-cognition is jñāna, but since jñāna is
nothing but its characteristic, i.e., awareness, in this case self-awareness, there will
not be an object for this self-awareness; that is, jñāna-cum-svasamvitti cannot addi-
tionally be posited as a lakṣya. And when a separate jñāna as karman does not exist,
it is absolutely impossible for self-awareness to exist.
The translators of PsP Tib have understood the sentence slightly differently, and ap-
pear to have taken asambhavāt as the reason for cognition not existing (thus:
jñānam … asambhavāl ….. sarvathā nāsti), and lakṣyābhāve as a conditional phrase to
be construed with nirāśrayalakṣaṇapravṛttyasambhavāt, understanding this as an
explanatory gloss to the tersely expressed reason asambhavāt of the main clause. PsP
Tib: shes pa de yang mi srid pa'i phyir rang gi mtshan nyid las tha dad par ma grub
la | mtshan gzhi med na rten med pa’i mtshan nyid 'jug pa med pa’i phyir rnam pa
thams cad du yod pa ma yin pas rang rig pa ga la yod |.
*LT's author glosses jñānam svalakṣaṇavyatirekeṇāsiddham with svalakṣaṇam
svasamvedyarūpatvam | tadvyatirekeṇāsiddham jñānam lakṣyabhūtam | (cf. Yoneza-
wa 2004: 124, 143 [fol. 2b5]). He explains that with svalakṣaṇa reference is made to
cognition's autoluminosity, and that cognition is viewed as the lakṣya for svasamvitti.
Stcherbatsky (1927: 144, n. 4) appears to correctly understand that Candrakīrti is
arguing that consciousness is impossible because it does not exist independently of
the (object-related) particular characteristic (his free translation however brings in
ideas not expressed by Candrakīrti). Sprung (1979: 55), whose understanding of the
passage otherwise remains obscure to me, interprets the word cognition (jñāna) as
referring to self-awareness (svasamvitti). Siderits (1981: 137) understands jñāna of
the sentence to refer to cognition, not self-awareness, but complicates matters by
interpreting the argument in the light of the concept of the ākāra of the object
appearing in cognition. Dan Arnold (2005b: 434) understands cognition (jñāna) to
refer to self-awareness. He translates: "Moreover, this latter cognition doesn't exist
at all, since—given that there's no subject to be characterized (lakṣya), owing to the
impossibility of [its] establishment by a separate svalakṣaṇa-there is no possibility
of the operation of a characteristic without a locus" (he does not translate kutaḥ
svasamvittih). Arnold (ibid., n. 76) criticizes Seyfort Ruegg for reading the sentencePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
237
And as it is stated in the Noble Ratnacūḍaparipṛccha:461
Not perceiving (i.e., not finding) the mind (citta),462 he inquires
into the mindstream (cittadhārā), thinking, “Whence does it (=
the mind) arise?" He reflects thus: "When there is an objective
support (ālambana), the mind arises. Then is the objective sup-
port one thing (anya) [and] the mind another (anya), or is exactly
that which is the objective support the mind? If, first, the
objective support is one thing (anya), the mind another, then one
will have two minds [when the mind, occasioned by the objective
support, arises]. But if the objective support is the mind, then
how does the mind perceive the mind? But it is not the case that
the mind perceives the mind. For example, the blade of a sword
is not able to cut that very [same] sword-blade; the tip of a finger
as having two reasons. See Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 109, n. 194) for Chos dbang grags
pa’i dpal's interpretation of the argument. It should be added that all of the previous
translators have been disadvantaged by PsP₁'s corrupt svalakṣaṇavyatirekeṇāsiddher
(for svalakṣaṇavyatirekeṇāsiddham).
46¹ The Ratnacūḍaparipṛcchā (RCP) is the forty-second tract of the Ratnakūṭa cycle
(cf. PsP₁ 62, n. 3). Part of this same citation attested in the PsP, with introductory
sentences not included here, is found at BCAP 392.10-393.5, also in the context of
the refutation of svasamvedana, and at ŚiS 235.1-8 (translated in Bendall and Rouse
1990: 221). The translators of PsP Tib, as usual, rely on a Tibetan translation of the
sūtra. The translation they have used is, with the exception of a few negligible
variants, none of which affect the sense, identical with the Canonical version of the
RCP.
462 Stcherbatsky (1927: 145, n. 6), against PsP Tib and RCP Tib, but in line with the
manuscripts, states that he prefers to read, with Burnouf (1844: 561) cittam samanu-
pasyan, arguing: "asamanupaśyan could only mean not having yet fully realized
what consciousness is (i.e. not having yet attained vipaśyana), he investigates ...'."
He translates (ibid., 145), “Considering consciousness he (the Bodhisattva) investi-
gates the stream of thought, and asks where it comes from." Sprung (1979: 55)
translates in reliance on Stcherbatsky's reading. The introductory sentences to the
citation attested in BCAP and SiS read however: sa cittam parigaveșamāno nādhyā-
tmam cittam samanupaśyati | na bahirdhā cittaṁ samanupaśyati | na skandheṣu cittam
samanupaśyati | na dhātuṣu cittam samanupaśyati | nāyataneṣu cittam samanupaśyati.
It is only logical that the next sentence must read sa cittam asamanupaśyamś citta-
dhārām paryeṣate ... . Dan Arnold (2005b: 435, n. 78) corrects Siderits' assumption
that tasyotpattir, instead of the pronoun sa, is the sentence's subject, but translates
tasyaivam bhavati commencing the next sentence as “Its [arising] is thus.” tasya in
this case refers back to the pronoun sa, thus to the person, not the mind.238
TRANSLATION
is not able to touch that very [same] fingertip. In exactly the
same way, the mind is not able to see that very [same] mind.” If
he correctly applies [himself] in this way, he knows and sees-in
a way that corresponds to truth (tathatā) that stream of mind
(cittadhārā), creeper of mind (cittalatā), the real nature
(dharmata) of mind, the non-fixedness (anavasthitata) of mind,
the not coming forth (apracăratā) of mind, the imperceptibility
(adṛśyatā) of mind, mind's not having a particular characteristic
(asvalakṣaṇatā), the non-abiding (anavasthanatā) of mind, [its]
being without annihilation, without eternity, [its] not being
immutable (kūṭasthatā), [the mindstream's] not [being] without a
cause (ahetuki),463 [its] not [being] opposed to conditions, [its]
not [being] from it[self] (tataḥ) or from another (anyataḥ), not
[being] the same (saiva) or other (anya)-and he does not resist
[this insight]. And he knows, he sees, that state of isolation (vive-
katā) of mind.464 This, O son of good family, is the concentration
of awareness (smṛtyupasthāna) consisting in, in regard to the
463 The transition from abstract forms (anavasthānatānucchedāśāśvatatā, kūṭasthatā)
to adjectives (nāhetukī, na pratyayaviruddhā, etc.) and their unclear reference is
somewhat problematic, but the author of the RCP apparently intends the adjectives as
attributes of cittadhārā and cittalatā. The understanding of the *LT's author supports
this: nāhetukī (or kā? ms ka) cittasya dhāreti śeṣaḥ (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 124, 143
[fol. 2b5]). The transition from cittadhārām and cittalatām to the abstract forms citta-
dharmatām, cittānavasthitatām, cittāpracāratām, cittādṛśyatām, cittāsvalakṣaṇatām
and cittavivekatām is also curious but would seem to indicate a transition from the
superficial level of reality to the ultimate level.
464 Dan Arnold (2005b: 435) for reasons unexplained translates citttavivekatā as
"analysis of thought," even though Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 111) has translated the
compound correctly as "Isolatedness [i.e. Emptiness] of thought" (cf. BHSD s.v. vi-
veka); the words viveka and vivikta (additionally viviktatā), having the senses of
"isolation" and "isolated," are used practically as synonyms of emptiness but usually
retain some of the sense of being separated from something, e.g., in cases where
things are explained as being "separate/isolated" from real existence, or from other
dharmas (because they do not exist), from qualities (i.e., because neither the qualities
nor that to which they might apply exist) or from own-being. In the YȘV,
Candrakīrti, comparing things, i.e., bhāvas, to ascetics who live isolated from
society, states that things are “isolated" in the hermitages of non-arising; Scherrer-
Schaub reconstructs *anutpādasya araṇyeṣu viviktāḥ (cf. YṢV 218, n. 388). See
Scherrer-Schaub's comments on vivikta and viviktatā in YṢV 218, n. 387 and n. 388,
and 244, n. 468.
trPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
239
mind [as object of concentration], the observation of the mind
(citte cittanupaśyanā).
465
Therefore, in this way, there is not self-awareness. Since it does not
exist, what is characterized by what?
$97. Furthermore, that characteristic (laksana) would exist either as
[something] distinct (bhedena) from the object characterized (laksya)
or as [something] not distinct (abhedena) [from it].466 Of those [two
465 On the smrtyupasthānas, see especially Schmithausen 1976; on their application
within Mahāyāna, pp. 259ff.; on tathatā representing the content of the initial insight
of the spiritual experience of Mahāyānist liberation and its integration into the
structure of the four concentrations of awareness, cf. p. 260: "Es ist einleuchtend,
dass dieses höchste Sein-die tathatā, die das wahre Wesen des (als solches unwirk-
lichen) leidvollen Daseins und seiner Entstehungsursachen ist und zugleich die
Befreiung davon, das Nirvāṇa, metaphysisch antizipiert, und die somit im Mahāyāna
anstelle der (gewissermassen in ihr verschmolzenen) vier ‘Edlen Wahrheiten' des
älteren Buddhismus den Inhalt der das spirituelle Ereignis der Erlösung initiierenden
Einsicht bildet—auch im Rahmen der vier ‘Konzentrationen der Aufmerksamkeit
zur Geltung kommen musste." Schmithausen refers to and translates the relevant sec-
tions of the Ratnacūḍaparipṛcchã concerned with the concentrations of awareness as
applied to feeling (261) and to the body (261f.).
466 Candrakīrti takes up a fresh line of argumentation against Dignāga's svalakṣaṇa
by considering it from the point of view of the svalakṣaṇa's numerical (as opposed to
qualitative) difference from or identity with a lakṣya. The svalakṣaṇa is thus bom-
barded from a new direction in order to reach Candrakīrti's objective of demolishing
this cornerstone of Dignāga's epistemology. Although the argumentation deals with
the topic of the relationship of lakṣaṇa and lakṣya in a general manner, Candrakīrti
may also have the specifics of the preceding discussion in mind. The PsP's Dignāga,
as has been demonstrated, maintains a (sva)lakṣaṇa that is to be understood as having
an object sense (karmasādhana), which translates to it being a lakṣaṇa that is free
from the need for a lakṣya; compare the example of solidity-cum-earth. Candrakīrti
points out that the positing of a lakṣaṇa that is independent of and thus exists as
something separate from a corresponding lakṣya is not tenable, because a lakṣaṇa of
this sort would be like any other thing that also exists separately from the relevant
corresponding lakṣya and that does not qualify as a lakṣaṇa. Candrakīrti may also be
intending to critique the idea of jñāna in the role of instrumental (sva)lakṣaṇa, since
solidity-cum-earth is indeed able to exist separately from jñāna and vice versa. jñāna
therefore cannot be considered the lakṣaṇa of earth because as something that can
exist separately, it is not earth’s lakṣaṇa any more than some other thing that exists
separately from earth and is not a lakṣaṇa (such as another lakṣya); and independent-
ly existing solidity-cum-earth cannot be a lakṣya by very reason of its independence,240
TRANSLATION
alternatives], if, first, [the characteristic exists] as [something]
distinct, then because it is distinct from the object characterized, like
[something that is] not a characteristic (alakṣaṇavat),467 [that] charac-
teristic [would] also not [be] the characteristic of that [object charac-
terized]. And because it is distinct from the characteristic, the object
characterized, like something that is not an object characterized (ala-
ksyavat), [would] also not [be] an object characterized. In the same
way, owing to the fact that [under this alternative] the characteristic is
distinct from the object characterized, the object characterized would
be independent (nirapekṣa) of the characteristic, and therefore
[would] not [be] a [real] object characterized, because of being inde-
pendent of the characteristic, like a sky-flower [which is independent
of a characteristic and not a real object characterized]. But if the ob-
ject characterized and the characteristic are not distinct [from one
another, i.e., are one and the same thing], then because [the object
characterized] is not separate (avyatirikta) from the characteristic,
like the own self (svātman) of the characteristic [is not separate from
the characteristic and is not a lakṣya],468 the object characterized
like all other things that do not qualify as lakṣyas. As support from the side of
authoritative testimony (āgama) for the argument against a separate lakṣaṇa and
lakṣya, Candrakīrti will cite Lokātītastava 11, in which, according to Nāgārjuna, the
Buddha himself asserts that a lakṣaṇa cannot be (numerically) distinct from its
lakṣya. Should Dignāga want to rescue his svalakṣaṇa by claiming that it is not
distinct from, but is rather identical with the lakṣya, he is shown that this too is
impossible. For Candrakīrti, lakṣaṇa and lakṣya can only exist (on the surface level)
in a relationship of mutual dependence, a relationship that excludes both distinctness
and identity.
467 The examples in the inferences in the above paragraph have not been understood
as logical examples in Arnold 2005b. The present example alakṣaṇavat has been
translated (ibid., 436) as “as though it were a non-characteristic” (“In this regard, if,
on the one hand, it's by virtue of difference, then because of being different from the
subject characterized, the characteristic wouldn't be a characteristic, either, as
though it were a non-characteristic").
66
468 Arnold (2005b: 437, n. 84) notes Seyfort Ruegg's misleading translation of lakṣa-
ṇasvātmavat (Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 112: "... the lakṣya's condition of being a lakṣya
would be lost, in the same way as the nature of the lakṣaṇa") but translates instead:
“….. the subject's being a subject (lakṣyatā) is forfeited, as though [the subject] were
itself the characteristic." The logical example lakṣyasvātmaval of the next sentence
has correspondingly been translated (Arnold 2005b: 437): “as though it were itself
the subject."PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
241
[will] forfeit its status as an object characterized. And since [the
characteristic] is not separate from the object characterized, like the
own self of the object characterized [is not separate from the object
characterized and is not a lakṣaṇa], the characteristic as well [will]
not have the nature (svabhāva) of a characteristic.
469
And as it is stated [in the Lokātītastava],+
If the characteristic [were something] other (anya) than the
object characterized, that object characterized would be without
a characteristic (alaksana).
When there is no otherness (ananyatva), the two are non-exist-
ent. [This] You have clearly stated.
And aside from identity (tattva) and otherness (anyatva), another op-
tion (gati) for the establishment of object characterized and character-
istic does not exist.
And similarly, [in the Madhyamakaśāstra] he (= Nāgārjuna) will
say,+
470
469 Candrakīrti cites Lokātītastava 11: lakṣyāt lakṣaṇam anyac cet syāt tal lakṣyam
alakṣaṇam | tayor abhāvo ’nanyatve vispaṣṭam kathitam tvayā ||. Tibetan in La Vallée
Poussin 1913b: 8; Sanskrit and Tibetan in Lindtner 1982b: 132. Translated in La
Vallée Poussin 1913b: 12; Lindtner 1982b: 133. On the Catuḥstava and its editions
and translations, see Lindtner 1982b: 121-124. Candrakīrti's purpose in citing the
verse, given that the discussion in the present context focusses on the samvṛti level, is
of course not to prove that lakṣaṇa and lakṣya are impossible, but rather to provide
scriptural support in order to convince Dignāga that neither lakṣaṇa nor lakṣya, espe-
cially in the present case a svalakṣaṇa, can exist on its own, i.e., both are necessary,
and that they can only exist in a relationship of mutual dependence. Cp. Lokātītastava
7 and 8, where it is made clear that two other pairs, i.e., designation (samjñā) and its
object (artha), and agent (kartā) and action (karman), cannot exist either as things
that are numerically different or as the same thing, but from the point of view of the
surface level, such pairs are asserted as existing in mutual dependence. Lokātītastava
7: samjñārthayor ananyatve mukham dahyeta vahninā | anyatve 'dhigamābhāvas tva-
yoktam bhūtavādinā ||, Lokātītastava 8: kartā svatantraḥ karmāpi tvayoktam vyava-
hārataḥ | parasparāpekṣikī tu siddhis te 'bhimatānayoḥ ||.
470 Candrakīrti cites MMK II.21: ekībhāvena vā siddhir nānābhāvena vā yayoḥ | na
vidyate tayoḥ siddhiḥ katham nu khalu vidyate ||. Oetke (2001a: 79) translates, "Wie
soll man denn wohl die Existenz von Dingen etablieren können, die sich beide weder242
TRANSLATION
How indeed is there the establishment of two [things]
Of which there is no establishment either by way of identity
(ekībhāva) or difference (nānābhāva)?
§98. But if [Dignāga argues:] There could be establishment (siddhi)
by way of inexpressibility (avācyatā).471
[We reply:] This is not the case, for so-called "inexpressibility"
comes into play when clear knowledge of the distinction of one
[thing] from another (parasparavibhāga) is lacking. And [in cases]
where there is no clear knowledge of the distinction [between two
things], when discrimination (pariccheda) from the point of view of
[their] difference [in the form] "this is the characteristic, this is the
object characterized" is impossible, both of them are simply non-
existent. Therefore, there is no establishment even by way of
inexpressibility.
§99. Moreover, if cognition (jñāna) is the instrument (karaṇa), what
is the agent (kartr) in the discrimination of the object (visaya)? And
without an agent there is no possibility of an instrument and so
forth 472 as in [the case of] the act (kriya) of cutting [where the
als identisch noch als verschieden etablieren lassen?" Cp. PsP Tib: gang dag dngos
po gcig pa dang || dngos po gzhan pa nyid du ni || 'grub par 'gyur ba yod min na || de
gnyis grub pa ji ltar yod ||.
471 Candrakīrti now proceeds to consider the case for the establishment of lakṣaṇa
and lakṣya as entities that cannot be defined in terms of identity or difference, a line
of defense utilized by certain Conservative Buddhists for the pudgala as regards its
relationship to the skandhas. According to them, pudgala cannot be analyzed in
terms of identity with or difference from the skandhas, because the relationship is
inexpressible (de La Vallée Poussin [PsP₁ 64, n. 3] cites BCAP 297.9: ... skandhe-
bhyas tattvānyatvābhyām avācyam pudgalanāmānam ātmānam icchanti). See also
Candrakīrti's argumentation against ātman as inexpressible as identical with or other
than the skandhas, together with argumentation against ātman as inexpressible as
permanent or impermanent (nityānityatvenāvācya) and inexpressible as existent or
non-existent (astitvanāstitvenāvācya) at PsP₁ 288.9-17.
472 "and so forth" of "instrument and so forth" (karaṇādīnām) refers to the other four
kārakas basic to the Pāṇinian theory of kārakas, to wit, 1) the object/patient
(karman), 2) the point of departure (apādāna), 3) that which the agent intends as goal
through the object of the action (sampradāna), 4) the locus (adhikaraṇa). As GaneriPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
243
473
instrument, e.g., an axe, requires an agent who performs the act of
cutting]. But if it is postulated that the mind (citta) is the agent in this
case,
that too is not correct, because the mind operates in the
perception (darśana) of the mere thing (arthamātra), the mental
factors (caitasa) with respect to the distinguishing features (viseșa) of
the object (artha), since it is accepted that:
Of those [two], consciousness (vijñāna) is perception (drsti) of
the object (artha), while the mental factors (caitasa) [are
directed] toward its distinguishing features (tadviseṣa).47
474
(1999: 52) states, "The term kāraka, derived from the verb kṛ ('to do, make'),
literally means that which makes the event." Things are kārakas when, being viewed
in relation to an action, they play specific roles in regard to the accomplishment of
that action (cf. Nath 1987: 145: "what makes a thing a kāraka is the power (sakti) of
bringing an action towards completion"). For example, in the sentence devadatto
rathena vanaṁ prāsādād gacchati, four types of kārakas are involved in the
accomplishment of the action of going. The agent (kartṛ) is defined as “[that kāraka
which is] independent [relative to others involved in an action]" (svatantraḥ kartā),
the independence of which is explained by Bartṛhari as due to, among other reasons,
the fact that it "suppresses the agency of other kārakas, whose participation is
subordinated to [it]" and due to the fact that "a sentence may denote no other kāraka
but denote an agent alone" (Cardona 1974: 239). See also Butzenberger 2000.
473
According to the AK, the words mind (citta), mental [faculty] (manas) and
consciousness (vijñāna) are synonymous: AK II.34ab: cittam mano 'tha vijñānam
ekārtham. For Candrakīrti in this section of the PsP, caitta, caitasa and the oppon-
ent's jñāna represent a second group of synonyms. *LT's author notes that the
mental factors are by implication stated to be the instrument: cittasya kartṛtvam ity
ukte arthāc caittānāṁ karaṇatvam uktam (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 124, 144 [fol. 2b5];
Yonezawa reads cittānām but the *LȚ manuscript clearly reads caittānām).
474 Candrakīrti cites MAV 1.8cd. MAV 1.8 as cited in MAVȚ (30.2, 45.8): abhūta-
parikalpaś tu cittacaittās tridhātukāḥ | tatrārthadṛṣṭir vijñānam tadviśeṣe tu caitasāḥ ||
(MAVBh: abhūtaparikalpaś ca ...). MAVBh to 1.8cd: tatrārthamātre dṛṣṭir vijñānam
| arthaviseșe dṛṣṭiś caitasā vedanādayaḥ || (MAVBh 20.19-20). If MAVBh is
followed, MAV 1.8 should be translated as “Of those [two], consciousness (vijñāna)
is perception (drsti) with respect to the object (artha), while the mental factors
(caitta) [are perception] with respect to its distinguishing features (tadviseșa)."
MAVȚ on tatrārthamātre dṛṣṭir vijñānam: mātraśabdo višeṣanirasanenāgṛhītaviśeṣā
vastusvarūpamātropalabdhir ity arthaḥ| (MAVȚ 31.16-17); underlined words
reconstructed by Yamaguchi. Stanley (1988: 38, n. 199) reconstructs viśeṣāpanaya-
nāyāgṛhītaviśeṣā. Arnold (2005b: 438, n. 91) notes that Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 113)
erroneously ascribes the MAV to Sthiramati.244
TRANSLATION
For when one principal activity (pradhānakriyā) is to be accomplish-
ed, there is the instrumentality, etc., of the instrument and so forth on
account of [their] becoming ancillary [to the principal action] by
virtue of effectuating the subsidiary actions (guṇakriyā), each
individually (yathāsvam).475 But in the present case (iha), there is not
Cp. AKVy 38.23-25 (ad AK I.16a: vijñānam prativijñaptiḥ; AKBh: viṣayam visayam
prati vijñaptir upalabdhir vijñānaskanda ity ucyate): vijñānaskandha prativijñaptir ity
arthaḥ upalabdhir vastumātragrahaṇam. vedanādayas tu caitasā viśeṣagrahaṇa-
rūpāḥ (Wogihara adds viśeṣā after caitasā but notes that višeṣā only occurs in the
Tibetan and is not attested in the AKVy mss; Śāstri does not add višeṣā). MAVȚ on
arthaviseșe drstiś caitasā vedanādayaḥ: evam caiṣām āśrayālambanakāladravya-
samatābhiḥ samprayuktatvam na tv ākārasamatayāpi vijñānāviśeṣaprasangat |
(MAVȚ 31.15-17). Mind and its mental factors are taught in the AK as being similar
in five ways: AK II.34cd: cittacaitasāḥ sāśrayālambananākārāḥ samprayuktāś ca
pañcadhā (the concept of ākāra in this kārikā is apparently different from that just
referred to in the MAVȚ); AKBhd 62.9: pañcabhiḥ samatāprakārair āśrayālamba-
nākārakāladravyasamatābhiḥ (see AKBh II.177f.; on the caittas, AKBh II.150, n.
2; Tillemans 1990: 285, n. 427). More references at PsP₁ 65, n. 3.
On the role of the MAV in Bhāviveka's works, see Saito 1998.
475 In general, the term “principal action" (pradhānakriyā) denotes the activity
indicated by a verbal root, such as the verbal root √pac. In the case of √pac, the
accomplishing of the cooking involves various individual subsidiary actions
(gunakriya), such as the internal conscious effort of the agent (kartṛ), the placing of a
pot on a stove or hearth, the placing of water and grains in the pot, blowing, heating,
etc. Pāṇinīyas thus consider that all activities are composites, and hold, given that the
subsidiary actions occur sequentially, that the unity of the principal action is a mental
construct (see Cardona 1974: 237).
In the case of a sentence that expresses Devadatta's act of cooking rice in a pot with
firewood (devadattas taṇḍulān edhaiḥ sthālyām pacati), Devadatta is the principal
agent (pradhānakartṛ) of the principal activity of cooking; in the process, he makes
the decisions as the activity proceeds, places the rice in the pot and the pot over the
firewood, ignites the firewood, etc. The firewood is the instrument of the activity of
cooking, the pot its locus, and the rice grains the object. Although Devadatta the
principal agent lights the firewood, sentences such as edhāḥ pacanti "the firewood
cooks" are also acceptable because firewood can be seen as participating as instru-
ment in the principal activity of cooking (on sentences like edhāḥ pacanti, where the
instrument of the principal activity is assigned its own agency, constituted by its
burning until the food is cooked, see Cardona 1974: 263; on the subsidiary agents
[gunakartṛ] of the individual subsidiary actions being considered as suppressed by
the principal agent, see 264). On the kārakas, see also Deshpande 1990.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
245
one [single] principal activity for cognition (jñāna) and consciousness
(vijñāna) [which you allege function respectively as instrument and
agent]. Rather, the principal activity of consciousness (vijñāna) is
discernment of the mere object (arthamātra), whereas [that] of cogni-
tion (jñāna) [is] the discernment of the distinguishing features of the
object;476 thus there is neither the instrumentality of cognition nor the
In the present passage, Candrakīrti calls attention to the fact that the instrument is
responsible for a subsidiary action; for example, in the case of cooking, the firewood
burns, thereby contributing to the principal activity of cooking.
L
De La Vallée Poussin (PSP₁ 65, n. 4) considers PSP Tib's byed pa la sogs pa rnams ni
bdag nyid ji lta bu’i bya ba phal pa sgrub pa’i sgo nas | gtso bor gyur pa’i bya ba cig
bsgrub par bya ba la yan lag gi ngo bor gyur pa las byed pa la sogs pa nyid du 'gyur
na to reflect karaṇādīnām yathāsvam guṇa dvāreṇa ekasyā ... sādhyāyā (sic)
angībhāvopagamāt karaṇāditvam. The translators have merely re-ordered the sen-
tence.
476 In the previous argumentation in this larger section, Dignāga attempted to rescue
his position that (sva)lakṣaṇa should be understood in the sense of an object (karman)
by positing jñāna as an instrument. Candrakīrti attacked this idea by considering
jñāna from the point of view of its being equivalent to vijñāna, specifically vijñāna
understood as equivalent to its lakṣaṇa viṣayam prati vijñaptiḥ. The present argument
may also implicitly intend reference to Dignāga's earlier assertion that jñāna as
instrument has as its object the solidity and so forth (kāṭhinyādi) of earth, because
this ability of Dignāga's jñāna to discriminate earth's aspects, i.e., its distinguishing
features such as solidity—as opposed to cognizing the mere object earth—means that
jñāna must be a mental factor (caitta). Cf. above n. 474, citing AKVy on AKBh ad
AK I.16a: vedanādayas tu caitasā viśeṣagrahaṇarūpāḥ, and MAVBh on MAV 1.8cd
arthaviseșe drstiś caitasā vedanādayaḥ. See also AK II.24, where Vasubandhu
presents the mahābhūmika caittas as: vedanā cetanā samjñā cchandah sparso matih
smṛtiḥ | manaskāro 'dhimokṣaś ca samādhiḥ sarvacetasi ||; Vasubandhu presents the
same group of caittas (the first five classified as sarvatraga, the last five as prati-
niyataviṣaya) in his Pañcaskandhaka as: sparśo manaskāro vedanā samjñā cetanā
cchando 'dhimokṣaḥ smṛtiḥ samādhiḥ prajñā (Li and Steinkellner 2008: 4f.).
Candrakīrti appears to be identifying Dignāga's jñāna with the mental factor sañjñā,
since sañjñā's function is, as Candrakīrti states above for jñāna understood as a
mental factor, the discernment of the distinguishing features of the object. AKBhed
54.20-21 (ad AK II.24) on sañjñā: samjñānam viṣayanimittodgrahaḥ; AKVy 127.24-
25: viṣayanimittagrahaḥ iti viṣaya-viśeṣa-rūpa-grāha ity arthaḥ; Pañcaskandhaka on
sañjñā: sañjñā katamā | viṣayanimittodgrahaṇam | (Li and Steinkellner 2008: 4). Cf.
also AKBhed 10.17-18 (ad AK I.14cd, corrected following AKBhå¡ 16.5-6): yan nīla-
pītadīrghahrasvastrīpuruṣamitrāmitrasukhaduḥkhādinimittodgrahaṇam asau samjñā-
skandhaḥ.
Dignāga's attempt to defend his positing of jñāna as the instrument (karaṇa) for the
(sva)lakṣaṇa (interpreted in the sense of an object) by asserting that the mind (citta)246
TRANSLATION
agency of mind (citta) [in this case of cognition characterizing the
particular characteristic], and therefore, just that fault [remains,
namely, that an agent is lacking].4
477
§100. If there were [this objection]: Because-since according to
authoritative testimony (agama) "All phenomena are without self"
(anātmānaḥ sarvadharmāḥ)478—an agent (kartṛ) does not exist in any
way whatsoever, linguistic usage (vyavahāra) of activity (kriyā), etc.,
[can] certainly occur even without an agent.
[We reply:] This too is not [acceptable], because [you have] not de-
termined the correct meaning of the āgama. But this has been
explained in the Madhyamakāvatāra.
479
serves as the agent (kartṛ) for the activity (kriyā) of cognizing, e.g., the solidity, etc.,
of earth is therefore shown by Candrakīrti to be nonsensical, since the mind that
cognizes the mere object and the mental factor(s) cognizing its features do not
function within the context of one and the same activity, but rather perform two
completely separate activities.
477 Candrakīrti, as might be expected, does not go into the grammarians' discussion
about sentences such as asiś chinatti "the sword/axe cuts" (in place of asină chinatti
devadattaḥ) or sthālī pacati “the pot is cooking (something)” (in place of devadattaḥ
sthālyām pacati) being acceptable given that that sword/axe and pot can also be seen
as functioning as agents of cutting and cooking. Cardona writes (1974: 235),
"Whether one speaks of swords and pots as agents of cutting and cooking, however,
the fact remains that these implements do not function totally independently (sva-
tantra); even when one uses [these sentences], one understands that the sword cuts
when wielded by someone and the pot cooks when someone has put food in it and set
it to cooking. Moreover, such implements are not agents without simultaneously
functioning as instrument and locus."
478 The statement appears in the Pāli Canon as sabbe dhammā anattā and there has
the meaning “all phenomena are not the self.” Cf., e.g., SN III.132.22-133.2: Evam
vutte therā bhikkhū āyasmantam Channam etad avocum Rūpam kho āvuso Channa
aniccam | vedanā aniccā | saññā aniccā | sankhārā aniccā | viññānam aniccam |
Rūpam anattā | vedanā | saññā | sankhārā | viññānam anattā | Sabbe sankhārā aniccā
sabbe dhammā anattā ti|; MN 1.228, 230. "Not the self" is said to be the third of the
three marks (trilakṣaṇa/tilakkhaṇa) of phenomena (cf., e.g., PTSD s.v. lakkhaṇa;
Conze 1967: 34ff.; for an explanation of why suffering is not mentioned in the SN
and MN passages just referred to, see Bodhi 2000: 1084, n. 180).
479 *LȚ's author, commenting on the sentence etad api nāsti, āgamasya samyag-
arthānavadhāraṇāt, explains that the āgama cited by the Epistemologist has the
intention of rejecting the agency of the ātman, but not additionally the agency of thePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
247
mind: anavadhāraṇād iti {|} ātmanaḥ kartṛtvam tatra vāritam na tu cittasyāpi | (cf.
Yonezawa 2004: 124, 144 [fol. 2b5]; Yonezawa reads cāritam for vāritaṇ). He adds,
regarding the PsP's mention of the MA: tatraivāvadhāryo 'tra nokta iti (cf.
Yonezawa 2004: 124, 144 [fol. 2b5]). The reference appears to be to MA VI.137 and
the respective MABh, and further to MABh ad MA VI.159a-c. Just before MA
VI.137, the opponent attempts to escape the consequence that agent (*kartṛ) and
object (*karman), that is, appropriator (*upādātṛ) and appropriated (*upādāna), will
be the same thing if he holds to his view that ātman exists as the shape/arrangement
(dbyibs; *ākāra, *samsthāna) of the skandhas by arguing that this appropriator-cum-
agent is not really some thing, because it is nothing more than the mere composite of
the skandhas (gang zhig byed pa po nyid du 'gyur ba nye bar len pa po ni 'ga' yang
yod pa ma yin pa nyid de | ’di ni nye bar len pa ’dus pa tsam zhig tu zad do; MABhed
260.12-13). Candrakīrti responds with MA VI.137cd: byed po med las yod snyam blo
yin na || ma yin gang phyir byed po med las med || “If [your] idea is that [even if] the
agent (*kartṛ) does not exist, the object (*karman) does exist, it is not [so], because
[if] the agent does not exist, the object [also] does not exist." Referring to MMK
VIII.13, he explains in his bhāṣya that the object cannot exist alone, because the
agent serves as its reason (rgyu, *hetu) for being: gal te byed pa po mi ’dod na rgyu
med pa'i las kyang 'dod par mi bya'o || (MABhed 260.18-19); something is designated
as object only in dependence upon an agent, and vice versa: de'i phyir ji ltar byed pa
po la brten nas las su gdags par bya la | las la brten nas kyang byed pa po yin pa de
bzhin du He closes by pointing out that the scripture which states that an agent is
not perceived but that the act and its maturation exist (byed pa po ni ma dmigs kyi las
kyang yod la rnam par smin pa yang yod do) has the purpose of communicating that
the agent does not exist by own-being; it does not communicate that the agent desig-
nated in dependence, which is an element of conventional linguistic usage (*vyava-
hārāṇgībhūta), is negated: ... brten nas gdags par bya ba tha snyad kyi yan lag tu
gyur pa yang bkag go zhes bya bar (MABhµn: pa) ni shes par mi bya'o || (see
MABhed 261.20-262.4; Huntington 1989: 257, n. 167. The entire section is found in
MABh 1911: 305-7; on p. 307, n. 2 de La Vallée Poussin refers to the Paramārtha-
śūnyatā). Again, toward the end of the atman critique (ad MA VI.159a-c),
Candrakīrti criticizes the person who, having understood certain discourses in a
mistaken way, incorrectly asserts worldly samvṛti thus: “the mere collection of parts
(*anga) exists, but the whole (angin) does not exist in any way at all, because it is not
perceived separate from it ... solely the act (karman) exists, the agent (kartṛ) does not
exist ...,” for the unwanted consequence of this person's reasoning is that the mere
parts, etc., will also not exist: gang 'ga' zhig gsung rab kyi don phyin ci log tu rtogs
pas yan lag tshogs pa tsam zhig yod kyi yan lag can ni rnam pa tham cad du yod pa
ma yin te | de las tha dad par ma dmigs pa’i phyir ro || las 'ba' zhig kho na yod kyi
byed pa po ni med do || ... zhes de lta bur rnam par gnas pa’i (MABhun: pa ni) ’jig
rten gyi kun rdzob phyin ci log tu smra ba de'i ltar na gtan tshigs de nyid kyis yan lag
la sogs pa tsam yang med par thal bar 'gyur bas ... (MABhed 278.9-18; MABhr 1911:
321).248
§101. Even if there were [this objection:] There is, for example, a
relationship of qualifier (viseṣaṇa) and qualificand (visesya) [between
the members of genitive constructions like] "the pestle's body"48
TRANSLATION
Stcherbatsky (1927: 149, n. 7) points to “e.g. Madhy. avat., 6.68ff." as the passage
Candrakīrti is alluding to here in the PSP, but MA VI.68cd and the citations presented
in the related MABh merely declare the non-existence of all things. Seyfort Ruegg
(2002: 114 and n. 205) erroneously understands artha of āgamasya samyagarthāna-
vadhāraṇāt as “object" and thus translates "For no correct intentional object has been
specified by the [cited] scriptural testimony" but does refer to MA VI.76.
However, as Arnold (2005b: 440, n. 96) has already indicated, MA VI.76 simply
asserts that the notion of svasamvedana is incoherent. One might add that although
MA VI.76 mentions the kārakas kartṛ, karman and kriyā, Candrakīrti introduces
them for the sake of demonstrating that they cannot be a unity and thus to prove that
paratantra cannot be known by itself. MA VI.76: tasmāt svasamvedanam asti naiva
kenānyatantragrahaṇam tava syāt | kartuś ca karmakriyayoś ca naikyam tenaiva tasya
grahaṇam na yuktam || (Li 2012: 12).
Siderits (1981: 141) comments on our main text's objection and response as follows:
"We can already see what Candrakīrti has in mind here, however, for we know that
the Yogācāra-Sautrāntika proposes to provide a correct definition of the worldly
practice with respect to pramāṇa and prameya; that is, his analysis is purported to be
nothing more than a description of conventional epistemic practice. As such, this
account is thoroughly ensconced on the side of samvṛti, that species of truth which is
determined by conventional linguistic behavior. Now it is well known that the
Madhyamikas reinterpret the doctrine of anātman as the doctrine of niḥsvabhāvatā,
the denial that there are ultimately any self-existent reals. Anātmavāda thus belongs
on the side of paramārtha or absolute truth
the epistemologist may not
legitimately employ the anātman doctrine in defense of some feature of his analysis,
for that analysis must proceed within the boundaries of those structures which govern
our linguistic behavior, and anātmavāda is not among these." One might qualify this
by stating that while it is true that things disappear when one moves to the ultimate
level, for Candrakīrti, even on the samvṛti level things are empty of real existence,
and it is this lack of real existence, of a real nature of things, that allows for dynamic
existence, because truly existing things could never change. On the samvṛti level
things can only exist in dependence, e.g., an agent exists in dependence on an action,
an instrument in dependence on an agent, etc., and vice-versa, and nothing exists
independently, i.e., an action or instrument cannot exist without an agent.
480 De La Vallée Poussin and some of the modern translators of the present section of
the PSP understand śilāputrakasya śarīram to mean "body of a statue," and not "body
of a pestle." Pa tshab translates śilāputrakasya śarīram into Tibetan as mchi gu’i lus,
thus taking silāputraka in the meaning of pestle. Cf. TCD, where mchi gu is
explained as rang 'thag gi yas rdo (the upper mill-stone) and mchig gu as rang 'thag
gi yas rdo but also as sgog gtun gyi yas rdo (the upper pestle); cf. also Jäschke (s.v.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
249
mchig), where mchig gu is said to be “a small mortar,” “a pestle." MW translates
silāputra literally as "little rock" and assigns to it the meanings "a grindstone” and “a
torso"; these same meanings are given for silāputraka. It should be noted, however,
that the Sanskrit texts note MW as attesting śilāputra and śilāputraka in the
meaning "torso," namely, the Sāṁkhyapravacanabhāṣya and the Bṛhadāraṇyakopani-
ṣadbhāṣya, respectively, only present the example silāputrakasya śarīram, without
further explanation. According to Apte, both śilāputra and silāputraka refer to a
lower stone: "a small flat stone for grinding condiments on." BHSD mentions that
śilāputra = niśādāputra, i.e., upper millstone or pestle, noting that Pāli nisadapota is
glossed in the Visuddhimagga as silāputtako and that the Mahāvyutpatti translates
silāputra as gtun bu (misprinted as gtur bu), i.e., as pestle. Only PW attests
silāputraka in the (single) meaning “eine Figur, eine Statue von Stein" (śilāputra, on
the other hand, is said to mean “Reibstein”), but the text reference given as support-
ive of the meaning of "statue” is the same as that supplied in MW for the meaning
"torso," namely the Brhadāraṇyakopaniṣadbhāṣya's sole attestation of silāputraka in
the uncommented example silāputrakasya śarīram. It is perhaps worth mentioning
that Cakrapāṇi, in Carakasamhitā Cikitsāsthāna 1.57.2, comments on the word
kūrcanna with jarjarīkaraṇasādhanam śilāputrakamusalādi, which indeed confirms
that at least there silāputraka means pestle (my thanks to Philipp Maas for this refer-
ence). One might add that Apte states that śarīra refers to the body of both animate
and inanimate objects.
The example silāputrakasya śarīram is also found, e.g., in the AKBh in the Sau-
trāntika refutation of the Sarvāstivāda view which holds that the mark of the condi-
tioned (samskṛtalakṣaṇa) known as arising (jāti) is a real entity. The Sautrāntikas
state that it is only for the sake of qualifying matter that the genitive construction
“matter's origination” (rūpasyotpāda) is employed, adding that this construction is
used so that one understands that the arising specifically refers to matter, lest the
arising of something else be understood. The situation is similar to that reflected by
other expressions, such as "sandalwood's odour, etc." or "śilāputrakasya śarīram”
(where odour and body are not something different from the sandalwood or the silā-
putraka but appear with them in genitive constructions for the sake of qualifying
them) (tasya viseṣaṇārtham rūpasyotpāda iti ṣaṣṭīm kurvanti yathā rūpasamjñaka
evotpādaḥ pratīyeta mā ’nyaḥ pratyāyīti | tadyathā candanasya gandhādayaḥ śilāpu-
trakasya śarīram iti [AKBhed 80.1-3]). Jinamitra and dPal brtsegs, the translators of
the AKBh, like Pa tshab in the present section, render śilāputrakasya śarīram of the
cited AKBh passage into Tibetan as mchi gu’i lus, thus understanding the phrase to
be referring to the body of a pestle (cf. AKBh Tib P 96a2; D 84a3). The fact that Pa
tshab translates silāputraka as pestle quite possibly indicates that the tradition of the
PSP transmitted to his pandita collaborator Mahāsumati in Kashmir also interpreted
śilāputraka as pestle, and not as “statue.” On the basis of the above, I have decided to
translate silāputraka as pestle. Nevertheless, the rendering of silāputraka as "statue"
in many of the modern translations of the PsP does not detract from the point being
made by Dignāga, since a statue can of course also be understood as something that
is not different from its body.250
TRANSLATION
[and] "Rāhu's head"48¹ even when a qualifier (i.e., a pestle, Rāhu) [as
some entity] separate from the body and head does not exist.
The translation equivalents for śilāputraka employed by modern translators of the
PSP section vary. Siderits (1981: 142) translates the compound as “statue." Thurman
(1991: 292, n. 11) states that he prefers, against Stcherbatsky, who translates
śilāputraka as “statue," to rely on Tibetan mchi gu in the sections of the PsP he
translates. Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 115) takes a middle path and translates "the body of
a torso/pestle." Arnold (2005b: 440, n. 97) writes, “the primary sense of silāputraka
is ‘millstone' or 'pestle,' which is reflected in the Tibetan (mchi gu)" but argues that
understanding silāputraka in this way might not be optimal: “If ….. we take it that
way, the point of this example would differ slightly from that of the other and
indeed, would not be altogether clear. The point would perhaps be that, insofar as the
word involves a semantic unit that ordinarily refers to persons (i.e., putra, such that
the word's nirukti makes it mean something like ‘stone boy'), one might be inclined
to suppose that the body of such is, like the body of a person, animate hence, the
force of the subsequent part where we're told that the ākāṁkṣā that goes with this
word is buddhi, 'intellect.' Thus, the reason a śilāputraka just is a body is that it is
inanimate (whereas a statue would only be a "body" if it happened to be a headless
statue). However, it seems to me preferable to follow Stcherbatsky (1927: 158) in
reading this to mean ‘statue'— in which case the point of the example is exactly the
same as that of the 'Rahu's head' example ." I doubt that considerations of
animate stone bodies and headless statues are relevant here. Arnold (and all of the
previous translators of the passage, in fact) has in part been misled by the idea that
the other associated thing (sahabhāvipadārthāntara—see Candrakīrti's response) that
is implied by the mention of "body" is "intellect, etc." (buddhyādi) rather than, as I
understand it, an individual who possesses or has control over the body (see n. 482).
As will be seen, with buddhyādi...vat Candrakīrti merely compares “body” to
"intellect" because the mention of these words and others like them suggests an
owner or possessor.
481 Rāhu, according to Indian mythology, was a Daitya who, subsequent to the gods'
churning of the ocean to retrieve the stolen amṛta, the nectar of immortality, sat
amongst the gods and drank a portion of the amṛta. Sūrya and Candra, the gods of
the sun and moon, revealed the fraud, upon which Viṣṇu beheaded the Daitya. The
head and trunk of the Daitya settled in the heavens as the immortalized Rāhu and
Ketu. Rāhu seeks to avenge Sūrya and Candra's exposure of him by pursuing them
through the stellar sphere, and when he catches them, he swallows them, thereby
causing eclipses; but since Rāhu only exists as a head, they reappear when they pass
out of his neck. Within Indian astrology, Rāhu and Ketu represent the ascending and
descending nodes of the moon (Basham 1988: 491). On Rāhu in eclipse mode as
susceptible to the influence of the chanting of Buddhist verses, see SN 1.50-51.
Rāhu as a mere head is set forth by hypothetical Dignāga as a second example of
things that are actually one but that may nevertheless be spoken of as existing in a
relationship of qualifier and qualified. Hypothetical Dignāga for now leaves aside his
earlier postulation of a karmasādhana lakṣaṇa-cum-lakṣya which has cognitionPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
251
Similarly, even when earth [as some entity] separate from [its]
particular characteristic (svalakṣana) does not exist, there will be [a
relationship of qualifier and qualificand for the members of the
genitive construction] “earth's particular characteristic."
[Reply:] This is not so, because [the case you intend to prove] is not
the same [as the other two]. For given that the words "body" and
"head" [respectively] presuppose another associated (sahabhāvin)
thing, in the same way that intellect (buddhi), etc., [presuppose
someone who possesses them] and hands, etc., [presuppose an
individual to whom they belong], when a thought (buddhi) which has
the mere word "body" or "head" as objective support (ālambana) is
produced [in someone], [this] person (jana) [will] certainly expect the
other associated thing, [wondering] "Whose body?" [or] "Whose
head?"482 It is reasonable that the other [person], for his part, wanting
acting as its instrument, and with this new argument focusses on the viseșya solidity
and its merely nominally existent viseṣaṇa earth, again attempting to circumvent
Candrakīrti's demand for a separately existing lakṣya.
482
My understanding of the sentence differs slightly from that of previous translators
for two reasons. First, I do not consider “intellect, etc., and hands, etc.” (buddhyādi-
pāṇyādi) to be the referents of either sahabhāvipadārthāntara or sahacāripa-
dārthāntara, but rather understand these items simply as further examples of things
like “body” and “head" which on their own imply or lead one to presuppose—in the
case of body and intellect, etc.—a “possessor” of them or in the case of head and
hands, etc.—a whole person who is constituted by these body parts and to whom they
thus belong. That is, on my understanding, the referent of sahabhāvipadārthāntara is
nothing other than the referent of sahacāripadārthāntara, namely, an "owner," the
existence of whom/which is assumed and expressed by the questions that enter the
mind of the person who has just heard the words "body" or "head." Compare, e.g.,
Siderits' (1981: 142) translation, which takes the referent of sahabhāvipadārthāntara
to be buddhyādipāṇyādi and that of sahabhāvipadārthāntara to be the person who
possesses buddhyādipāṇyādi: “In the case of the words 'body' and 'head', their
occurrence being related to other associated things like intellect and hands, when the
object consisting of just the words ‘body' or 'head' is productive of intellection, it
occurs having the requirement (expectation) of some other associated thing to
complete the sense: 'The body of whom?' 'The head of whom?"" It is not entirely
clear to me if Seyfort Ruegg (cf. 2002: 115f.) understands sahabhāvipadārthāntara
and sahacāripadārthāntara to have the same or separate referents; his translation,
which further unexpectedly associates 'head' with buddhyādi and 'body' with
pāṇyādi, reads: "For—given that in the case of the words 'body' and 'head' there
operates a [semantic] dependency on a further, accompanying, thing ... such as a252
TRANSLATION
thought, etc., (buddhyādi) [in relation to a head], and a hand, etc. (pāṇyādi) [in
relation to a body]-there is present the additional production of a thought having as
its object the words ‘body’ and ‘head (śarīra-śiraḥśabdamātrālambano buddhyupa-
jananaḥ [?] = lus dan mgo'i sgra tsam dmigs pa'i blo skyes pa lta žig), and
involving precisely the (syntactic-semantic) expectation of a further, accompanying,
thing ..., [this expectation taking the form of the enquiry] 'the body of whom/what?',
'The head of whom/what?', etc." Arnold assumes that the referent of both saha-
bhāvipadārthāntara and sahacāripadārthāntara is buddhyādipāṇyādi, and, like
Seyfort Ruegg, associates "head" with buddhyādi and "body" with pāṇyādi.
Arnold (2005b: 441) translates: "For the use of words like 'body' and 'head' depends
on other associated categories, such as, [in the case of 'heads'], intellect, etc., and, [in
the case of bodies,] hands, etc. That being the case, the production of an idea based
on the words 'body' or 'head' creates a semantic expectation regarding the other
associated categories, [such that one expects to know] whose body? whose head?"
*LȚ's author similarly appears to have mistakenly understood Candrakīrti to be
saying that the mention of a body (śarīra) implies things like buddhi: śarīram ity ukte
{} buddhyādisahabhāvipadārthāntarasāpekṣatā bhavati | (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 124,
144 [fol. 2b6]).
Second, earlier translators have had to struggle with PsP₁'s almost surely corrupt text
śarīrasiraḥsabdamātrālambano buddhyupajananaḥ, a reading also attested by the
manuscripts. I am grateful to Lambert Schmithausen for suggesting the emendation
janaḥ. The emendation assumes that a scribe's early, pre-ms-P eyeskip was respon-
sible for the loss of the akṣara ne of my critical text's ᵒupajanane and of the ja of the
subject janaḥ (eyeskip na to na[ḥ]). I further assume that the preceding compound,
which reads śarīraśiraḥśabdamātrālambano in PsP₁ and the manuscripts, originally
read ᵒālambana and was compounded with buddhyupajanane.
*LT's author's comment on the word sākānkṣaḥ of the compound sahacāripa-
dārthāntarasākānkṣaḥ, to wit, [s]ākānkṣa iti pratipattā (the originals of sākānkṣa
was wrongly copied as initial a), makes explicit the reference to the person who un-
derstands the words "body" and "head." The *LȚ thus supports the emendation
buddhyupajanane janaḥ. Yonezawa, on the other hand, considers the *LT ms's
ākānkṣa to represent the citation of the PsP's following kānkṣām and therefore
emends PsP's kāṁkṣām to ākāṁkṣām, a change that cannot be accepted; cf. Yone-
zawa 2004: 124, 144 (fol. 2b6).
66
Lack of access to the subject janaḥ left Seyfort Ruegg and Arnold with little choice
but to understand upajananaḥ as the sentence's subject (Seyfort Ruegg: “... there is
present the additional production of a thought having as its object the words 'body'
and 'head' ...”) and probably explains Arnold's free translation of vartate as
"creates" ("... the production of an idea based on the words 'body' or 'head' creates
a semantic expectation …..”). Siderits’ (1981: 142) assumption that buddhi of buddhy-
upajananaḥ is the subject of the verb vartate and his presentation of PsP's alamba-
no (the masculine form clearly indicating that it is the final member of a bahuvrīhi
compound) as if it were part of a locative absolute construction is, however, inex-
plicable (“when the object consisting of just the words 'body' or 'head' is productive253
to prevent a connection [of the word "body" or "head"] with [any]
other qualification, removes the expectation (kāṁkṣā) of the compre-
hending person (pratipattr) by [stating] the qualifying word (dhvani)
"pestle" or "Rāhu," [both of] which are in conformity with worldly
convention (laukikasanketa). But in this case [of particular character-
istic], where earth, etc., separate from solidity, etc., do not exist, a
relationship of qualification and qualificand is not tenable.483
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
of intellection, it occurs having the requirement (expectation ...).” It should be
mentioned that Stcherbatsky (1927: 150, n. 3), apparently also puzzled by PsP₁'s
text, noted that ᵒālambano might have originally read ᵒālambana and been connected
to the following compound, an idea that I accept: “buddhyupajananaḥ for upajāta-
buddhiḥ or alambana-buddhy-upajananaḥ (sc. puruṣaḥ)"; he presents as his literal
translation (ibid., 150, n. 5): a man who produces a thought intent upon only the
words body and head is always (eva) in expectation of the coexisting other things,
'whose the body', 'whose the head'?”
66
De La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 66, n. 3) comments on PsP Tib's sgra tsam la dmigs pa’i
blo skyes pa lta zhig gang gi lus with "Si lta-zhig peut remplacer hga-zhig, la-la-
zhig, il s'oppose à [g]cog-ços (itara = eka-tara), et nous avons: 'Un homme intelligent
(blo-skyes-pa? buddhimān janaḥ) entend pronouncer le mot tête et se demande: la
tête de qui? ...'.” It is difficult to reconstruct what the PSP Tib translators might have
read in their manuscript(s). On the meaning and usage of Ita zhig, see Hahn 1994:
289ff.
483 Candrakīrti makes the point that head and body, for example, in contradistinction
to solidity, which according to Dignāga is not something different from earth, pre-
suppose and imply other things (antarapadārtha), that is, numerically different
things, these "things" being the "possessors" or "owners" of head and body. Rāhu is
just one of the innumerable possessors of heads in this world, and it is the mention of
his name that reveals, for the person for whom the mention of the word "head" has
sparked a desire to know exactly whose head is being referred to, the identity of the
owner of this specific head. The fact that Rāhu has lost the rest of his body and can
be considered, as Dignāga intends to present him, as nothing more than his head is
more or less irrelevant here: in the world, Rāhu is accepted as someone/something
different from the mere head inasmuch as he is acknowledged as the possessor of his
head, like all other possessors of heads. The case of the pestle is the same: the
mention of “body” brings about the hearer's desire to know who or what possesses
said body. The information that the possessor of the body is a pestle excludes every-
one and everything but a pestle; that the reference is only to a pestle and not to some
person by no means detracts from the fact that on the level of worldly convention a
pestle is acknowledged as having a body. As indicated by Candrakīrti, similar to
Rāhu and his head, a pestle is conventionally accepted as something different from its
mere body and thus appropriate to be characterized as in a relationship of qualifier
and qualificand with it. In the case of earth and solidity, on the other hand, which are254
§102. If [Dignāga argues:] Since the non-Buddhists (tīrthika) accept a
separate object characterized (lakṣya), [our] assertion of a qualifica-
tion (viseṣaṇa), which is in conformity with that [acceptance], is
without fault.484
TRANSLATION
envisioned by Dignāga as existing in a relationship of qualifier and qualificand even
though he holds them to be one and the same thing, a relationship of qualifier and
qualificand is excluded, because such a relationship can only occur between two
separate things. Thus the argument brought forth by Dignāga to preserve some sem-
blance of a lakṣya, be it only nominal (that is, earth is the merely nomimal lakṣya of
the (sva)lakṣaṇa solidity), is faulty because Dignāga's lakṣya does not exist separ-
ately from the lakṣaṇa; there is simply no qualifier for the opponent's lakṣaṇa.
Arnold's summation of the paragraph slightly misses the point. He states (2005b:
442, n. 103), "Thus, adjectival 'qualification' (viseṣaṇa) is called for only when there
is some syntactic ‘expectation’ (ākāṁkṣā), such that we need to know more in order
to know precisely which token of some type is being picked out. In contrast, since
there cannot meaningfully be any earth which is not ‘earth' by definition which is
not, that is, possessed of the characteristic that makes it an instance of 'earth'-we do
not, when encountering some instance of 'resistance,' wonder what it belongs to; for
when one encounters an instance of ‘earth,' one just is encountering an instance of
'resistance.' This is just what it means for the latter to be a defining characteristic of
the former.” Candrakīrti’s emphasis, however, is less on qualification being demand-
ed by "expectation” than on qualification requiring separate things. And as Candra-
kīrti has made very clear, the view of the non-difference of earth and its
characteristic is the opponent's view, not his own. Arnold's subsequent contention
that the argument presented in the paragraph counters Dignāga's stance that
perception (pratyakṣa) has access to uninterpreted data because it "advances the
point that we invariably encounter things as they are defined. That is, tokens of the
type 'earth' are invariably encountered under a description (viz., as ‘hard' or ‘resist-
ant')" is an overinterpretation.
484 Non-Buddhists such as the Vaiseșikas and Naiyāyikas posit a categorical
difference between substance (dravya) and quality (guna), the coalescence of which
is facilitated by the separate category inherence (samavāya); see, e.g., Halbfass 1992:
75, where it is stated, “At any rate, classical Vaiśeșika considers samavāya as a
principle that is supposed to account for the cooccurrence and coalescence of
different and ontologically distinct world constituents within concrete things. In a
sense, it restores the unity and concreteness of things after their categorical decompo-
sition" (see also ibid., 70-72, and chapters five and six).
Dignāga argues here that his positing of earth as a viseṣaṇa, and indeed as one that is
in a relationship with its visesya, is legitimate because non-Buddhists like the
Vaiseșikas and Naiyāyikas posit substance (dravya) as something separate from its
quality (guna), even though the two have been caused to coalesce by inherence.
Neither Seyfort Ruegg nor Arnold explains the argument. Stcherbatsky (1927: 150f.)PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
255
[We reply:] This is not so. For it not proper (nyāyya) to accept into
[your] own doctrine (svasamaya)485 the entities (padārtha) bereft of
reasoning that are postulated by the non-Buddhists, because this
would entail that [you would] also accept other means of valid
cognition (pramāṇa) and such.486
§103. Moreover, like designations (prajñapti) such as the person
(pudgala), [which actually exist as appropriators of things such as the
skandhas],487 a pestle actually exists as the appropriator (upādātr) of
wrongly understands Dignāga to be speaking ironically and intending the acceptance
of the qualification to be from the Madhyamaka side (150, n. 9: “it is a jeer at the fact
that the Madhyamika prefers the realistic logic of the Naiyāyikas and rejects the
reforms of the Buddhist logicians"). Arnold (2005b: 443) does not explain why he
translates višeṣaṇābhidhāna as “[our] definition of characteristic."
The Jainas likewise posit substance (dravya) and quality (guna) as distinct categories
(Halbfass 1992: 78). The Mīmāmsakas also maintain the existence of substance
separate from its qualities (see, e.g., Bhatt 1989: 362-364). Classical Sāṁkhya
appropriates the Vaiśeṣika doctrine of the categorical distinction between substance
and quality (see, e.g., Frauwallner 1984: 313-315).
485 Arnold (2005b: 443, n. 106) considers Seyfort Ruegg's (correct) translation of
svasamaye as “into one's own doctrine” to be based only on PsP Tib (“Ruegg [2002:
116] ….. reading svamata per the Tibetan rang gi gzhung lugs”) and thus translates
svasamaye as "with regard to your own occasion," which does not make much sense
in the present context.
486 Should Dignāga accept any of the entities or views posited by the non-Buddhist
schools, he would be met with the consequence that he would also have to admit,
along with other unacceptable entities and doctrines, the means of valid cognition
(pramāṇa) by which the objects propounded by the respective school are known and
validated. For example, in addition to direct perception and inference, authoritative
testimony (sabda) and comparison (upamāna) are accepted by the Vaiseșikas and
Naiyāyikas (implication [arthāpatti] is additionally accepted by the Prabhākara-
Mīmāmsakas, negation [abhāva] by the Bhāṭṭa-Mīmāmsakas and the Vedāntins, and
possibility [sambhava] and tradition [aitihya] by the Paurāṇikas; see, e.g., Hattori
1968: 78, n. 1.12; Randle 1976: 305). The tenet fundamental to Dignāga's system of
the existence of only two pramāṇas and two corresponding prameyas would
therewith be demolished. Cf. also PsP₁ 67, n. 1 and Siderits 1981: 141.
487
Cp. Candrakīrti's MA argument against the thesis that the ātman is the same thing
as the skandhas in which he states that the appropriator must be something different
from that which is appropriated, because otherwise act and agent would also be the
same thing: len po rang nyer len gcig rigs dngos min | de lta na las byed po gcig nyid
'gyur || (MA VI.137). Ultimately, neither appropriator nor appropriated exists, but on256
that [which is] appropriated (upādāna), viz., [its] own body, [that is,
actually exists] as a qualifier (viseṣaṇa) that is a component of world-
ly linguistic practice (laukikavyavahāra) [inasmuch as that pestle is]
generally established without analysis, and Rāhu actually exists as
appropriator of [his] head, the appropriated; therefore, this example
(nidarśana) [of pestle and Rahu as substantiation for your claim that
earth which you maintain does not actually exist as something sep-
arate from its particular characteristic-is a qualifier of the particular
characteristic] is inappropriate.
488
TRANSLATION
the surface level, both appropriator and appropriated are accepted as existing; they
exist on the surface level in mutual dependence (MABhed 261.12-14), and if one does
not exist, the other cannot exist. Candrakīrti substantiates his argumentation for an
agent which exists as an element of worldly linguistic activity in MABh ad MA
VI.137 with authoritative testimony (āgama) that asserts the existence of the person
(pudgala, gang_zag): “This person caught up in ignorance also creates
good/wholesome impulses" (ma rig pa dang rjes su 'brel pa'i gang zag 'di ni bsod
nams mngon par 'du bya ba yang mngon par 'du byed do [MABhed 262.4-6]).
*LȚ's author comments on the example of pudgala and its relationship to the
example of the pestle as follows: yathā {|} avidyamāne pi pudgale rūpādyupādānā
pudgalaprajnapti[s] tadvat sari[ra]m upādānam kṛtvā {} śilāputraka upādātā
upādīyate prajñapyate | (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 124, 144 [fol. 2b6]).
I agree with Arnold (2005b: 443, n. 108) that Seyfort Ruegg's qualification “designa-
tional" is uncalled for and detracts from the point Candrakīrti is making (cf. Seyfort
Ruegg 2002: 116: "Moreover, given the [designational] existence of a śīlaputraka
...”).
488
Just as the pudgala actually exists as a legitimate element of conceptual activity
and linguistic discourse on the non-analyzed worldly level in the form of the appro-
priator of the skandhas, so do pestles and Rāhu actually exist as the appropriators of
respectively their bodies and head on this level. Dignāga has, however, expressly
stated that the lakṣya (= earth, etc., his intended qualifier) does not actually exist, and
thus any comparison of this non-existent lakṣya-cum-proposed-qualifier with the
examples of the existing qualifiers pestle and Rāhu is unacceptable.
*LT's author states that the examples of pestle and Rāhu are incorrect because a
relationship of qualifier and qualificand is not possible when there is not a qualifier:
ayuktam iti | višeṣaṇābhāve pi viśeṣaṇaviśeṣ[y]abhāva iti na yuktam | (cf. Yonezawa
2004: 124, 145 [fol. 2b7]). He explains: samvyavahārasiddhasya višeṣaṇasya bhāvād
eva (cf. ibid., 124, 145 [fol. 2b7]; Yonezawa [p. 145] erroneously associates this
sentence with the following paragraph in the PsP).
De La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 67, n. 3) reconstructs PSP Tib as api ca śarīra-upādāna-
viseṣaṇa[sya] laukikavyavahārāṁgībhūta-avicāra-prasiddha[sya] upādātṛ-śilāputra-
ka[sya], śira-upādāna[sya] upādātṛ-rāhoś ca pudgala-ādi-prajñapti-vat sadbhāvān
nidarśanam etad ayuktam, but Pa tshab has merely changed the word-order, con-PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
257
§104. If [Dignāga retorts:] The example is indeed established, because
another thing separate from body or head is not established since
there is the perception (upalambha) of only that [body or head].489
[We reply:] This is not the case, because [first,] analysis (vicāra) does
not take place in this manner in worldly practice, and [second,]
worldly things (laukikapadārtha) exist from the non-analytical point
of view. For exactly as the self (ātman), being analyzed, is not
possible as [an entity] different from the body (rūpa), etc., and yet
from the point of view of worldly convention (lokasamvṛti) it exists
[as something] based on (upādāya) the constituent elements (ska-
ndha), so also [do] Rāhu and the pestle [exist from the point of view
of worldly convention]; therefore, [your] example is not established.
Thus, even if in the case of earth, etc., an object characterized
(lakṣya), when analyzed, does not exist separately from solidity, etc.,
and a characteristic (lakṣaṇa) separate from the object characterized
(lakṣya) [would be] without a basis (nirāśraya), nevertheless, in view
of [the fact that] this is (i.e., that we are dealing with) the surface
[level], the Masters have determined that there is establishment
(siddhi) by virtue of an establishment (siddhi) [that consists in] mere
mutual reliance (parasparāpekṣā).4⁹0 And it certainly has to be
densed the two sadbhāvāts into one, and omitted sva. De La Vallée Poussin seems
also to have overlooked that khyad par du byed pa (viseṣaṇasya) is to be construed
with rten pa po (upādātuḥ).
489 PSP Tib reverses the two reason clauses (gal te de tsam zhig dmigs pas lus dang
mgo las tha dad pa’i don gzhan ma grub pa'i phyir dpe grub pa nyid do zhe na ), but
the Sanskrit can also be read this way, and in fact makes more sense when construed
thus. Both Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 117) and Arnold (2005b: 444) read śarīraśirovyati-
riktasyārthāntarasyāsiddhiḥ as giving the reason for tanmātrasyopalambhaḥ.
490 Cf., e.g., MMK VIII.12 (cited earlier in §82): pratītya kārakaḥ karma tam pratītya
ca kārakam | karma pravartate nānyat paśyāmaḥ siddhikāraṇam ||. Arnold (2005b:
445, n. 118) considers ācāryāḥ to be employed as an honourific plural intending
Nāgārjuna ("The teacher [Nāgārjuna] ...”). This is certainly possible, but since
Candrakīrti otherwise regularly uses ācārya in the singular when he is referring to
Nāgārjuna, I have chosen to interpret ācāryāḥ as including Nāgārjuna and (at least)
Aryadeva. Both Arnold and Seyfort Ruegg read the iti before ācāryāḥ as indicating a
full stop (Arnold 2005b: 445: “nevertheless, this is the convention. The teacher
[Nāgārjuna] settled the matter ...."; Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 118: "even so [there is
here] this [existence on the] surface-level. Teachers have propounded ...”), but I258
TRANSLATION
491
accepted that this is so: for otherwise, the surface [level] (samvṛti)
would not be divorced from reasoning (upapatti), [and it would
follow,] then, [that] this (= the alleged surface level) would be
exclusively true reality (tattva), [thus] not [at all] the surface
[level].4⁹¹ And not only are the pestle and so forth, when analyzed
with reasoning, impossible, but, by dint of argumentation (yukti) that
will be stated [in later chapters], bodily matter, feeling, and so forth,
are also not possible. Thus it would have to be maintained that they
too, like the pestle, etc., do not exist on the surface level [if, following
your procedure, the ultimate state of affairs is applied to the surface],
but this is not the case (i.e., you do not maintain that that which is
appropriated, i.e., the object qualified, does not exist on the surface
level).* Therefore, this [comparison with the two examples] is
fallacious. 493
492
understand it as intended in a connective sense, specifically, as indicating that the
previous clause provides the reason for the subsequent statement.
491 *LT's author comments on the paragraph to this point as follows: yady
avicā{sa?}ra samvṛtir na bhavetadātvam eva na bhavet (read: yady avicārā samvṛtir
na bhavet tadā tattvam eva bhavet ?) | tata upapat[t]yā na viyujyeta | (cf. Yonezawa
2004: 124f., 145 [fol. 2b7]; Yonezawa [p. 145] edits the comment as: yady avicāraḥ
samvṛtinā bhavet tadā tvam eva na bhavet | tata upapattyā na viyujyeta |).
4⁹2 Candrakīrti chides Dignāga for jumbling the levels of reality and applying
reasonings and conclusions associated with ultimate analysis to the surface level. On
the surface level, the level where critical analysis is set aside and everyday linguistic
practice is given priority and granted credibility, things, which include the self and
the skandhas, pestles and their bodies, and Rāhu and his head, are accepted as
existing. When examined by reasoning, however, not only the appropriating self,
pestles, and Rāhu, but also the appropriated skandhas, bodies and head are revealed
to be ultimately non-existent. Candrakīrti argues that the opponent who maintains
that a lakṣya is in a relationship of qualified-qualificand with its lakṣaṇa is dealing
with the surface level and must therefore accept the real existence of the lakṣya.
When, as here, Dignāga claims that the appropriating entities pestles and Rāhu, etc.,
do not really exist, he is speaking from the ultimate point of view, and from this point
of view the objects appropriated, qualified, etc., are as non-existent as the
appropriator, qualifier, etc.
Arnold (2005b: 445, n. 123) rejects de La Vallée Poussin's emendation teṣām api
samvṛtyā śilāputrakādivan nāstitvam āstheyam syān na caitad evam ity asad etat for
the reading ... silāputraka ivāstitvam āstheyam syān ... found in the three manuscripts
used for PSP₁, and translates: “"hence, their existence, too, like that of the statue,
would have to be accepted as conventional. And this is not how [you accept them];
hence, [your position is] false." Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 118) apparently accepts de LaPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
259
Vallée Poussin's emendation silāputrakādivat but rejects the emendation nāstitvam:
"Hence, as in the case of the śīlaputraka, etc., on the surface-level (samvṛtyā) their
existence is to be accepted ... . But since it is not [really] so, [in ultimate reality] it is
non-existent (asat = yod pa ma yin)." rnold argues that the attestation in "some
versions of the Tibetan,” viz., in P, N and G, of yod pa ma yin pa nyid, on which de
La Vallée Poussin based the emendation nāstitvam (D and C attest yod pa yin pa
nyid), may represent a corrupt reading, and is of the opinion that his translation
"seems more straightforwardly to follow what precedes it, as Candrakīrti's point is
instead that the merely 'conventional' existence of the skandhas is precisely what we
have to accept. I take this as stated counterfactually, then, insofar as it is a conclusion
that Candrakīrti thinks his interlocutor wishes to avoid (though of course Dignāga's
generally Abhidharmika idea that there is an enumerable set of ‘ultimately existent'
entitites involves only svalakṣaṇas, not the skandhas)." However, exactly the
emendation suggested by de La Vallée Poussin is attested by ms Q (ms P attests śilā-
putrasyevāstitvam), and it has to be accepted as correct because Candrakīrti is
obviously referring with na caitad evam to the fact that the assertion in the previous
clause, to wit, that one would have to maintain that the skandhas as well do not exist
on the surface level, is not accepted by Dignāga, because he, like his fellow Mahā-
yānist Candrakīrti, maintains their non-existence only ultimately. Arnold, presum-
ably because his interpretation of Dignāga's views overlooks his Yogācāra affiliation
and thus his final denial of all things but the mind, considers Dignāga to maintain that
things ultimately exist, and hence has the clause emphasize the mere surface-level
existence of the skandhas. However, their conventional existence is not at all in
question here, since it is accepted by Dignāga. Candrakīrti exposes with this part of
the sentence the consequence entailed by Dignāga's denial of a constituent part of the
surface level, namely, that if he denies that pestles and Rāhu exist, then he will have
to maintain that all the things appropriated, such as the skandhas, also do not exist.
493 As noted in my Sanskrit edition, ms Q includes another, following sentence: eṣā
copādāyaprajñaptivyavasthā vistareṇa madhyamakāvatāre vihiteti tata eva parya-
nvesyā "And since this establishment by way of dependent designation has been set
forth in detail in the Madhyamakāvatāra, it should be sought right there." PsP Tib
supports ms Q's reading with: brten nas btags par rnam par gzhag pa 'di yang dbu
ma la 'jug pa las rgyas par bstan pas de nyid las yongs su btsal bar bya'o. The topic
of dependent designation is, however, really not relevant to the present flow of
argumentation or to the point Candrakīrti is making. As my discussion regarding the
PsP manuscripts indicates, ms Q attests a number of words and sentences that do not
occur in ms P but do appear in the Tibetan translation, which demonstrates that at
least one of the manuscripts relied on by the Tibetan translators was closely related to
Q's manuscript tradition. Since there is usually no paleographical support in ms P for
a loss of these words and sentences, and since the majority of them can be shown to
supply explanatory or extra material, I consider them additions made by post-
Candrakīrti scholars, students and/or scribes. Arnold (2005b: 445f.), who could not
have known of the complexities of the manuscript tradition when his work on the
section was published, includes the sentence in his translation. Seyfort Ruegg (2002:TRANSLATION
§105. If there were [this objection]: What use is this trifling
examination (sūkṣmekṣikā)?! For we definitely do not assert that all
that ordinary practice with regard to valid cognition and what is cog-
nized (pramāṇaprameyavyavahāra) is true; rather, this general estab-
lishment by the world is validated by way of this procedure (nyāya)
[i.e., by way of our determining, defining, and explicating the means
of valid cognition and their respective objects, etc.].494
260
[Reply:] We too assert [the situation to be] such: What use is this
trifling examination that leads [us] into worldly practice? Let this sur-
face [level], which has reached its own [real] existence (ātmabhāva-
sattā) through mere error (viparyāsa) [but which is nevertheless] the
cause of the accumulation of wholesome roots conducive to liberation
(mokṣa) for those desiring liberation, stand [as valid] as long as one
has not penetrated true reality (tattva).4⁹5 You, however, [who] have
119, n. 218) cites and translates the Tibetan sentence in a note, but does not include
this translation in his main text. The sentence is not commented on in *LT and, on the
basis of evidence which indicates that the manuscript relied upon by *LȚ's author
may have been closer to ms P's tradition than ms Q's, it is quite possible that it also
did not appear in *LȚ's PSP exemplar.
494 Dignāga retorts that he doesn't need to be tutored about the ultimate and surface
levels: he, like Candrakīrti, accepts that things do not exist ultimately and exist only
superficially. He emphasizes that his focus is merely what the world accepts: he in-
quires into, defines and, where appropriate, elucidates the epistemologically relevant
entities already accepted by the world on the strength of its perception. I have trans-
lated, following Candrakīrti's interpretation of the situation, vyavasthāpyate as “vali-
dated." From Dignāga's actual point of view, "adjusted" might be more appropriate.
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 119) translates hetu as “motivating cause," possibly con-
sidering samvṛti as equivalent to samsāra attended by duḥkha. It seems, however,
that Candrakīrti is intending to convey the idea that even though the everyday level
of existence is actually an illusion erroneously brought about by the ordinary per-
son's mind/ignorance, this illusion is to be accepted as general consensus maintains it
because it is on its basis and in relationship to the objects in it that the spiritual life
can be taken up and spiritual development can occur (cp. MMK XXIV.10). The
illusion itself is thus the cause that allows for spiritual activity. As Candrakīrti
declares in the following sentence, Dignāga, in depriving-via his revisionary
insistence on mere (sva)lakṣaṇas—the everyday level of half of its components, i.e.,
of its lakṣyas, is destroying samvṛti.
495
Arnold (2005b: 447) construes tiṣṭhatu as a separate sentence that relates to the
preceding sentence (“We, too, say, What's the use of this hair-splitting, which delves
into ordinary discourse? Let it be!") but it should be taken, as PsP Tib does, as thePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
261
introduced reasoning (upapatti) in certain cases (kvacit) inasmuch
as [your] thinking is sloppy (durvidagdha) as regards the distinction
between surface [truth] and ultimate truth-inappropriately (anyāya-
taḥ) 4⁹6 ruin this [surface level].497 Owing to [my] proficiency (vai-
cakṣaṇya) in the determination of the surface truth, I [on the other
hand], [in] situating [myself] exclusively on the worldly side [and in]
invalidating, by way of other reasonings [of my own] the various rea-
sonings (upapattyantarantara) [you have] adduced for the sake of
denying one aspect of the surface [level], obstruct like an elder in
the world (lokavṛddha) [someone] straying from [proper] worldly
conduct (lokācāra) only you, certainly not the surface [level].4⁹98
verb for the longer, following sentence. Cp. Stcherbatsky's (1927: 154) free trans-
lation: "As to phenomenal reality, leave it alone ... !" Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 119)
understands the sentence's structure as I do, but translates the bahuvrīhi viparyāsa-
mātrāsāditātmabhāvasattākā as "wherein the existence of an entity is acquired
through mere misapprehension."
4⁹6 Stcherbatsky (1927: 154, n. 4), translating anyāyataḥ as “wrong logic,” suggests
the reading anyāyato 'nyato nāśayati for anyāyato nāśayati. His suggestion does not
make much sense, and the text anyāyato nāśayati as found in PsP₁ is supported by all
six manuscripts consulted and by PSP Tib.
4⁹7 Arnold (2005b: 447, n. 127) argues that upapatti is the referent of PsP₁'s etām but
the position of this pronoun (emended on the basis of manuscript evidence to enām)
in the sentence indicates that it refers to the preceding samvṛti. Candrakīrti argues in
the subsequent sentence that he (unlike Dignāga) does not harm samvṛti. Seyfort
Ruegg (2002: 120) also takes upapatti to be the referent of enām: "However, because
[your] intellect (buddhi) is not expert in making the distinction (vibhāga) between
samvṛti and paramārtha, your honour ruins (nāśayati : 'jig par byed pa) without
reason (anyāyatas = rigs pa ma yin pa las) the justification (upapatti = 'thad pa) after
having [nevertheless] introduced it in some place (kva cid... avatārya).”
=
66
498 I understand the complete phrase lokavṛddha iva lokācārāt paribhraśyamānam to
be intended as a comparative example, and do not, as Stcherbatsky, Siderits, Seyfort
Ruegg and Arnold do, take Candrakīrti to be directly referring to Dignāga as
lokācārāt paribhraśyamānaḥ (Seyfort Rugg [2002: 120]: "... in the manner of an
elder of the world …, I confute (nivartayāmi = zlog par byed pa) only you who have
fallen away from the way of the world"; Arnold [2005b: 447]: “Like a respected
elder (lokavṛddha), I overturn one argument dedicated to the refutation of one part of
the conventional by another argument—and in so doing, I refute only you, who are
deviating from the conduct of the world.”). Rather, Dignāga, in denying lakṣyas as
constituent elements of samvṛti, is like someone who strays from the worldly moral
code and is stopped by a wise elder. In the example, lokācāra (worldly con-
duct/practice) has a moral sense and thus in its primary meaning does not perfectly262
TRANSLATION
Therefore, if [the focus is] worldly practice, then there absolutely
must be, like the characteristic (lakṣaṇa), also the characterized
(lakṣya); and thus, [since you do not posit the latter,] that very fault
[pointed out earlier, namely, that the characteristic would be without
a basis, remains].4⁹⁹ But if [the focus is] the ultimate, then because the
characterized does not exist [on this level], the pair of characteristics
(lakṣaṇadvaya) also do not exist. Thus how [can there be] the pair of
means of valid cognition (pramāṇadvaya)?
§106. But if [you argue]: A derivation (vyutpatti) of words which in
this way presupposes a connection of action and kāraka (kriyākāraka-
sambandha) is not accepted [by us].500
match the object of comparison, but of course secondarily it fits the comparison to
the worldly vyavahāra under discussion.
49⁹ Arnold (2005b: 448, n. 129), in contrast to PsP Tib, Stcherbatsky and Seyfort
Ruegg, but in conformity with Siderits (cf. 1981: 147), prefers to read lakṣaṇaval
lakṣyeṇa as a compound: "then there must also be a subject that possesses a charac-
teristic (lakṣaṇavallakṣyeṇāpi bhavitavyam)." He argues, "Given that Candrakīrti has
wanted all along to show that Dignāga's conception of svalakṣaṇa founders on the
necessity of admitting that there must be some lakṣya in which it is instantiated, the
reading I have chosen seems to make more sense." Candrakīrti did earlier state that
in the world an entity that possesses a particular characteristic is held to be charac-
terized by it, but there he was arguing against Dignāga's declaration that a (sva)la-
kṣaṇa is to be understood in the object sense (karmasādhana). His main point
throughout this larger section has been that if there is a lakṣaṇa, there must also be a
lakṣya, certainly not that there has to be a lakṣya that possesses a lakṣaṇa or one in
which a lakṣaṇa is instantiated. The stress is on the fact that there must be two things,
and that they exist in a relationship of mutual dependence.
500
Dignāga makes a final attempt to rescue his pair of characteristics (svasāmānya-
lakṣaṇa) with an outright rejection of the normative Pāṇinian theory according to
which words presume a connection to an action and functional activity related to one
of the six kārakas, the reference in the above being specifically to the word lakṣaṇa
understood as an instrumental kāraka (= karaṇa) in connection with a characterizing
event. By liberating the word lakṣaṇa from the constraints of the kāraka system,
Dignāga considers that he has exempted it from Candrakīrti's demand for the lakṣya
required by the existence of an instrumental lakṣaṇa. Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 121) and
Arnold (2005b: 448) translate kāraka here and in the following paragraph as “agent"
but the collective group of kārakas are meant (“agent” is represented by the word
karty within the kāraka categorization).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
263
[We reply:] Then this is more than wrong (atikaṣṭa). You transact
linguistically by way of exactly those words that start from a
connection of action and kāraka, but do not want a meaning for a
word (śabdartha) such as action (kriyā), instrument (karaṇa), etc.
Unbelievable your procedure is contingent on nothing but [your
own] wish[ful thinking]! 501
§107. And when in this way the pair of objects cognized (prameya-
dvaya) are unestablished, then authoritative testimony (āgama) and so
forth, inasmuch as they [can] no [longer be maintained as] having
general characteristics (sāmānyalakṣaṇa) as [their] object (visaya),502
501 Siderits (1981: 148) translates, "This is quite unfortunate, you conduct yourself by
means of those very words whose functioning is by means of the verb-case relation
and yet do not wish the meaning of a word to be derived from verb, case, etc.;
amazing, this practice of yours, which is entirely contradicted by the wish!” It should
be noted that kārakas are not equivalent to the nominal declension groups. Ganeri
(1999: 52), referring to Matilal's translation of part of NBh ad NS II.1.16 (“In this
way it is neither the thing itself nor the action itself that is a kāraka. What then?
When a thing is a participant in an action or when it is endowed with a special
functional activity [kriyāviśeṣayukta], it becomes a kāraka”; cf. NBh 64.1-2), writes,
"A kāraka is clearly conceived of here as a specific causal role. It is now widely
recognized that it would be a mistake to identify the kāraka categories with the
purely grammatical cases, by which I mean the nominal declension groups.
Although, if one excludes the vocative and the genitive, which is a noun-noun rela-
tion, there is a superficial correspondence between kārakas and declensional groups,
it is clear from the above that the kārakas are semantic, not syntactic, relations." It is
unclear why Arnold (2005b: 448) translates pravṛtti of the final sentence as "sense"
("You fool! Your sense is bound to a mere fancy"). Stcherbatsky (cf. 1927: 155 and
n. 3; 156 and n. 1) overinterprets Dignāga's objection as hinting at apoha theory and
thus formulates Candrakīrti's reply accordingly.
502
āgama is, according to Dignāga, not an additional means of valid cognition be-
cause it is subsumed under inference (anumāna). Hattori (1968: 78, n. 1.12) explains
that a cognition based on word (śābda) knows its object through the exclusion of
other objects (anyāpoha), a process which is the function of anumāna. Cf. PS V.1: na
pramāṇāntaram śābdam anumānāt tathā hi saḥ | kṛtakatvādivat svārtham anyāpohena
bhāṣate ||; Skt in Pind 2009: Appendix 1; Hattori 2000: 139. See also, e.g., Tucci
1930: 50; Katsura 1979b; Katsura 1982; Pind 2009; Hattori 2000. Pind (2009: 76)
translates: "[V]erbal cognition] is not a means of cognition separate from inference
(anumānāt). That is, a [word] denotes (bhāṣate) its own referent (svārtham) by
exclusion of other [referents] (anyapohena) like [the general property] being
produced,' and the like." Both anumāna and sābda are concerned with concepts, i.e.,264
TRANSLATION
[will] not be[, as you claim they are,] not further means of valid
cognition (pramāṇāntara),503
§108. Moreover, [your] definition (lakṣaṇa) [of pratyakṣa] has insuffi-
cient extension (avyāpitā), because [it] does not include worldly
linguistic usage like "the pot is pratyakṣa" (i.e., a direct perceptible)
and because [you allegedly] accept the linguistic practice of non-
the general, conceptually constructed and linguistically tinted characteristics of their
objects (cf. Hattori 1979: 61f.). See also PS II.5ab: āptavādāvisamvādasāmāṇyād
anumānatā (cf. Lasic et al. 2012: 29; Lasic 2010: 521). For translations and
interpretations of the verse-half, see Tillemans 1990: 18ff., Krasser 2012b; Lasic
2010; Eltschinger 2007: 70, 218ff. upamāna is likewise classified under inference:
when an authority states a sentence such as "a gavaya is similar to a cow," this, ac-
cording to Dignāga, is verbal cognition (śābda); also when one cognizes the similar-
ity oneself based on later observation of the two objects the understanding of the
similarity functions like anumāna. PSV ad PS V 50d: upamānam tāvad gogavayādiṣu
sārūpyapratipattyartham. tatra parata upaśrutya yā pratītiḥ sā śābdam. svayam tu
dvayārtham <pramāṇāntareṇā>dhigamya manasā sārūpyam <yadā> kalpayati,
<tadā> tad api na pramāṇāntaram. nāpy evam adhigamyamānam sārūpyam prame-
yam. evam anyāny apy anumānavikalpāvyatiriktatvāt parikṣiptavyāni (translation in
Pind 2009: 116f.; see his n. 643 for PST's Skt text and its English translation; PSV
Tib cited in Hattori 1968: 79, n. 1.12). Candrakīrti argues here in the PsP that since
the pair of objects of cognition, namely, the particular characteristic and the general
characteristic, have been shown by him to be impossible, āgama can be accepted as
having as its object something other than the general characteristic assigned to it by
Dignāga, and that as a means of valid cognition based on an object other than the
general characteristic, āgama will have to be admitted as an independent type of
cognition. The same will hold for upamāna. As Candrakīrti will later indicate, he
accepts both āgama and upamāna as means of valid cognition on the samvṛti level.
De La Vallée Poussin conjectures [sva]sāmānyaᵒ on the basis of PsP Tib's rang dang
spyi'i mtshan nyid; none of the Skt manuscripts, however, attest sva. It is true that
pratyakṣa's object is the svalakṣaṇa, but pratyakṣa is not topical in the present
argument. Although one might argue that Candrakīrti includes svalakṣaṇa in order to
exclude it as a possible or indirect object of agama, I follow the Skt manuscripts
because the argument is more specific and cleaner without it. PsP Tib's rang dang
may, however, be the legitimate translation of an interpolated sva that was attested in
one of Pa tshab's manuscripts, the inclusion of which would have been inspired by
the mention of prameyadvayam in the preceding clause.
503 *LT's author clarifies the double negative construction with āgamādeḥ pramā-
ṇāntaratvam yuktam (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 125, 145 [fol. 2b7]).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
265
Nobles [i.e., ordinary people]; therefore, this [definition] is not ten-
able.504
§109. If there were [this argument from Dignāga's side]: Blue and so
forth, i.e., the appropriated [substratum] (upādāna) of the [notion]
pot, [may be designated] pratyakṣa (i.e, direct perceptibles) because
[they] are what is distinguished (paricchedya) by the means of valid
cognition pratyakṣa. And therefore, just as, when metaphorically
504 Candrakīrti commences his refutation of Dignāga's definition of pratyakṣa, which
will focus to a large extent on the etymological understanding of the word itself. The
definition of pratyakṣa given by Dignāga at PS 1.3c makes it clear that for him,
pratyakṣa refers to a type of consciousness: pratyakṣam kalpanāpoḍham (cf. Stein-
kellner 2005: 2; Hattori 1968: 25 and 82, n. 1.25, 1.27; the definition occurs already
at NM 15a: see Katsura 1982: 84; Tucci 1930: 50; Tillemans 1990: 274, n. 367). PSV
Tib ad I.3c explains: shes pa gang la rtog pa med pa de mngon sum mo (cf. Hattori
1968: 176); Steinkellner (2005: 2) reconstructs: yasya jñānasya kalpanā nāsti, tat
pratyakşam. See also Jinendrabuddhi's commentary (cf. Steinkellner et al. 2005: 37):
svabhāvavipratipattinirākaraṇāyāha – pratyakṣam ityādi | pratigatam akṣam pratya-
kṣam prādisamāsaḥ | etal lakṣyam | kalpanāpoḍham iti lakṣaṇam | kalpanāyā
apodham apagatam kalpanayā vāpoḍham rahitam kalpanāpoḍham | kalpanāpoḍha-
nirdeśāc ca jñānātmakam tad iti gamyate | yato jñānasyaiva kalpanāsamsargo 'sti,
atas tatpratiṣedhena tad eva pratīyate. Candrakīrti criticizes the definition as being
too narrow because Dignāga's definition thus excludes regular worldly usage ac-
cording to which pots, etc., not consciousness, are pratyakṣa.
Arnold (2005b: 449, n. 135) notes, "He begins by stating the main point he will be
concerned to make: that on the conventional use of the word pratyakṣa, it is the
adjectival sense ('perceptible') that is primary. In fact, pratyakṣa must be an
adjective in the example adduced by Candrakīrti; the noun form of the word is
neuter, and in Candrakīrti's example it has taken the masculine gender of the word
(ghataḥ) that it modifies"; it is correct that Candrakīrti understands pratyakṣa as an
adjective, but as we shall see, Dignāga also considers it an adjective. See also CŚT Ted
64.10 where the Epistemologist opponent, when asked what he holds pratyakṣa to be,
replies: shes pa mngon sum yin; see Tillemans 1990: 274, n. 367. Arnold (2005b:
449, n. 136) rightly critiques Seyfort Ruegg's translation of avyāpitā (Seyfort Ruegg
2002: 122: "Furthermore, this is without foundation since, for the [postulated]
lakṣaṇa, there exists no [logical-epistemological] pervasion …”).
*LT's author records that Candrakīrti states that the definition is not tenable because
it is not broad enough, explaining that the world calls a pot pratyakṣa and yet
Dignāga says that according to the linguistic practice of ordinary people pratyakṣa is
cognition: kiñ ca pramāṇalakṣaṇam ayuktam avy[ā]pitvāt | yato loke ghaṭa[ḥ] pratya-
kṣa ucyate | tvayā tu anārya(ms: ācārya)vyavahāreṇa jñānam (cf. Yonezawa 2004:
125, 145f. [fol. 2b7-3a1]; Yonezawa does not correct ācārya° to anāryaᵒ).266
TRANSLATION
applying the effect to the cause, one designates as "happy the birth of
the Buddhas" (buddhānāṁ sukha utpādaḥ),505 in the same way, meta-
phorically applying the cause to the effect, [one] designates a pot
pratyakṣa, even though [its] causes (nimitta), blue and so forth, are
[all that is actually] directly perceived.
506
505
De La Vallée Poussin refers to buddhānām sukha utpādaḥ as an "exemple
classique." This pāda and the rest of the verse appear in the AKBh ad AK I.10d:
buddhānām sukha utpādaḥ sukhā dharmasya deśanā | sukhā samghasya sāmagrī
samagrāṇāṁ tapaḥ sukham || (AKBhed 7.13-14; AKBhøj 10.9-10). The source of the
verse is Udānavarga XXX.22, where the first pāda reads sukham buddhasya
cotpadaḥ (the other three pādas are identical to those in the AKBh; parallels in
Pāsādika 1989: 21). The verse in the AKBh is used to exemplify the metaphorical
usage of the effect, there hunger (jighatsā), in regard to the cause, the tangible that
produces desire for food: jighatsā bhojanābhilāṣakṛt | kāraṇe kāryopacārāt | yathā |
buddhānām sukha utpādaḥ ... (AKBhed 7.12f.; AKBhå; 10.7f.). Yaśomitra cites the
same example in regard to the case of the metaphorical understanding of sparsa by
the Sarvāstivādins (AKVy 305.16: yathā sukho buddhānām utpāda iti; cf. AKBhed
143.20-23). At PsP₁ 70, n. 2, de La Vallée Poussin quotes H.C. Warren's free
translation of a passage in VM XVII: “Karma is called existence because it causes
existence, just as the birth of a Buddha is called happy because it results in happi-
ness" (Buddhism In Translations. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University, 1906, p.
194). The passage occurs at VM 571: Kammam pana yathā sukhakāraṇattā: sukho
Buddhānam uppādo ti vutto, evam bhavakāraṇattā phalavohārena bhavo ti vedita-
bban ti. VM 697: “Karma aber ist mit Rücksicht auf die Wirkung als der Werde-
prozess zu verstehen, da es eben den Werdeprozess erzeugt, genau wie die Geburt
eines Erleuchteten als ein Glück bezeichnet wird, weil sie ein Glück erzeugt."
Siderits, Seyfort Ruegg and Arnold translate sukhaḥ as a noun, but it is an adjective
(Siderits [1981: 149]: “Thus just as the birth of the Buddha is termed 'pleasure"";
Seyfort Ruegg [2002: 122]: "Hence, just as the Buddha's birth is designated ... as
bliss"; Arnold [2005b: 450]: "Hence just as it is taught that “the birth of buddhas is
bliss"; cp. Stcherbatsky [1927: 157, n. 1]: “Hence, it is said that the birth of
Buddha is agreeable"). I have translated vyapadiśyate actively to avoid breaking the
quotation.
506
Dignāga refers to the primary and secondary meanings of pratyakṣa in PSV on PS
I.41cd (PS I.41cd: sarvathā nārthavijñāne sthitā pratyakṣadhīr bhavet ||). Steinkellner
(2005: 22) presents the PSV text as: pratyakṣaśabdo hi trișu vartate pramāṇajñāna-
viṣayeṣu. tatra pramāṇe mukhyo 'nyayor upacāritaḥ. tatra viṣaye pratyakṣameyatvāt
pratyakṣopacāraḥ (reconstructed Sanskrit text italicized; for Jinendrabuddhi's com-
ments, see Steinkellner et al. 2005: 177ff.). Arnold (2005b: 450, n. 139) translates
from the Tibetan (Tibetan in Hattori 1968: 233): “The word pratyakṣa is used with
respect to three things: the reliable warrant, the awareness [that results from the
exercise thereof], and the object [of this awareness]. With respect to these, [the usage
designating] the reliable warrant is primary, and the others are secondary (nye bar267
[Reply:] Metaphorical usage (upacāra) in regard to such an object (=
pot) is not appropriate. For in the world birth is perceived to be
different from happiness; and because [the birth of a future Buddha]
has as its cause many hundreds of hardships since it has as its nature
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
btags = Skt. aupacārika). In this regard an object is [figuratively] characterized as
'pratyakṣa' since it is cognized by [the reliable warrant called] pratyakṣa."
tr
Compare the stance of the PsP's hypothetical Dignāga with the position of Epistem-
ologist opponents (identified as rtog ge pa rnams) in Candrakīrti's commentary on
CŚ XIII.1 (CŚTTed 63.21-64.1): 'di la rtog ge pa rnams¹ na re bum pa la mngon sum
nyid yod pa ma yin pa kho na ste | gzugs la sogs pa rnams kyi rang gi mtshan nyid ni
bstan du med pa yin la | mngon sum gyis bsnyad par bya ba’i mig la sogs pa’i rnam
par shes pa'i yul yin pa'i phyir mngon sum zhes bya bar 'dogs so || (¹CŚTTed reads
rtog ge ba rnams). Tillemans (CŚȚ 176) translates, “On this point the logicians (rtog
ge pa = tārkika) argue as follows: The vase is not at all pratyakṣa; the particular char-
acter (rang gi mtshan nyid svalakṣaṇa) of [visual] form and the other [eight
substances] are inexpressible and are designated as 'pratyakṣa' because they are the
objects of the visual consciousnesses, etc., which is what is [really] said to be pratya-
kṣa." Thus the Epistemologists referred to in both the PSP and the CŚT prioritize
consciousness and only secondarily designate sense data as pratyakṣa. Having come
under fire for his too narrow definition of pratyakṣa, the PsP's hypothetical Dignāga
goes one step further and also allows for the metaphorical designation of things like
pot as pratyakṣa. Compare the explanation of the CST opponents, who present their
school's customary view on the matter (CŚȚTed 64.1-4): bum pa ni blos yongs su
brtags pa tsam yin pa’i phyir rang gi mtshan nyid du yod pa ma yin la | gang la rang
gi mtshan nyid yod pa ma yin pa de la ni dngos kyi gnas pas mngon sum nyid mi srid
pa 'ba' zhig tu ma zad kyi de la btags pa’i mngon sum nyid kyang mi rung ngo ||.
Tillemans (CŚT 176f.) translates, “Because the vase is merely something completely
imaginary, it does not exist as a particular character, and whatever lacks a particular
character cannot in reality be pratyakṣa, not only that but it cannot even be metaphor-
ically designated as pratyakṣa.” A pot cannot be metaphorically designated pratyakṣa
because the idea of a pot is nothing but conceptual overlay, superimposed onto the
perceived sense data.
tr
=
Cp. the Yuktidīpikā’s explanation (YD 78.13-16) as to why the object of perception
may be termed pratyakṣa: āha: yadi tarhi adhyavasāyaḥ pramāṇam katham laukikaḥ
prayogo 'rthavān bhavati pratyakṣam vastv iti | ucyate: yathā prasthapramito
vrīhirāśiḥ prasthaśabdavācyo bhavati evam pratyakṣapramito 'rthaḥ pratyakṣaśa-
bdavācyaḥ syāt |. Schmithausen (1972: 160f.) translates (following Chakravarti's ed.,
p. 40.25ff.): "Objection: If ‘means of knowledge' (lit.: ‘measure’) [and therefore also
pratyakṣam] is [defined as] determination (i.e. activity of the buddhiḥ), how [can you
explain as] making sense the common usage that a thing is pratyakṣam? Answer: Just
as a heap of rice which has been measured by a prastham (= a certain measure of
capacity) is [itself] called a prastham, thus an object cognized (lit.: measured) by
means of pratyakṣam (= direct perception) may [itself] well be called pratyakṣam (=
directly perceived), [too]."268
the mark of the conditioned (samskṛtalakṣaṇa),507 it is nothing if not
unhappy (asukha). When it is designated as “happy,” it is [in reality]
not at all connected [with happiness], so that (iti) metaphorical usage
in such a case is appropriate.508 However, in this [case of] "the pot is
pratyakṣa," there is of course not an apratyakṣa (i.e., imperceptible)
[thing] called pot that is apprehended separately (prthak) [i.e., apart
from its upādāna], which might, on account of metaphorical usage,
be [termed] pratyakṣa (i.e., a direct perceptible).5
TRANSLATION
507 PSP Tib reads 'dus byas kyi mtshan nyid kyi rang bzhin yin pa'i phyir dang | dka'
ba brgya phrag du ma’i rgyu can yin pa'i phyir for samskṛtalakṣaṇasvabhāvatvād
anekaduṣkaraśatahetutvāt. It is possible that one of the Sanskrit manuscripts relied
on by Pa tshab and his paṇḍita collaborators contained a ca (°hetutvāc ca), or they
may have added it themselves because they did not think that the mere fact that birth
has the nature of a samskṛtalakṣaṇa was suitable as a ground for it being occasioned
by many hundreds of difficulties. I have not emended the Sanskrit because one can
still make sense of the sentence without the addition of ca. I do, however, in contrast
to Seyfort Ruegg and Arnold, accept PsP Tib's understanding of anekaduṣkaraśata-
hetu as a bahuvrīhi, because I am not familiar with duşkara being commonly referred
to in texts as the consequence of mere birth, and because it is often stated that a
bodhisattva on the path must carry out many difficult tasks (duṣkaracārya), such as
self-sacrifice. Additionally, the reference to birth as the cause of many hardships as
concerns the birth of a (future) Buddha is problematic. One could, on the other hand,
following Seyfort Ruegg's and Arnold's interpretation, possibly consider that with
samskṛta Candrakīrti had in mind samskāraduḥkhatā and with anekaduṣkaraśata was
thinking of duḥkhaduḥkhatā (on the three-fold duḥkhatā, see Schmithausen 1977).
Arnold (2005b: 450) uses the infelicitous but unfortunately ubiquitous translation
"compounded" for samskṛta (samskṛtalakṣaṇasvabhāvatvāt "which is because of its
having as its nature the characteristic of [being] compounded”). samskṛta is properly
translated as "conditioned,” not least because atoms, which are certainly not com-
posites, are also included in this category. See n. 325.
508 asambaddha, which I render as “not connected," is translated by Seyfort Ruegg
(2002: 122) as “inappropriate” (“Being described as bliss is indeed inappropriate
..."); Arnold (2005b: 450) translates it as "incoherent” (“With respect to the sort of
object where what is being taught – ‘it [i.e., birth] is happiness' – is incoherent ...”).
It is possible that the Sanskrit formulation is somewhat inexact, but grammatically
asambaddha(h) has to refer to utpāda, not to what utpāda is described as, i.e., sukha.
50⁹ Candrakīrti accepts Dignāga's example illustrating the metaphorical transfer of
the designation of an effect to a cause but rejects his explanation of the transfer of the
designation pratyakṣa to a pot. In the case of the example, the effect, namely, the
"happy" state experienced upon liberation from the cycle of birth and death, is
applied to the cause, namely, the very unpleasant situation of birth within samsāra.
The cause (i.e., utpāda) taken in its primary sense (mukhyārtha) is exactly the oppos-PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
269
§110. If [Dignāga argues]: Because a pot does not exist separately
from blue, etc., [it is] metaphorically pratyakṣa.
[Reply:] Even in this way, metaphorical usage is still more (sutarām)
unreasonable, since there is no basis (āśraya) to which it (= the status
of being pratyakṣa) could be metaphorically applied;5¹0 for sharpness
is not metaphorically applied to the horn of a donkey!
§111. Moreover, pot is part of worldly discourse (lokavyavahāra). If
[you], considering [a pot] not to exist as [something] separate from
blue, etc., postulate that its perceptibility is metaphorical, [then] this
being the case, should [it] not [additionally] be supposed, since blue,
ite (= asukha) of the effect (= sukha), and thus metaphorical application sublates the
primary meaning of birth in this instance of reference to the birth of Buddhas. On
Dignāga's explanation of pratyakṣa, to arrive at pot metaphorically designated as
pratyakṣa, there would have to be two instances of metaphorical designation. First, as
he indicates in the first sentence of his objection, pratyakṣa in its primary meaning
consciousness is applied to consciousness' object, the sense data, namely, blue, etc.
(see n. 506). The pratyakṣa status received by the sense data, which constitute pot's
material cause, is then in a second step transferred to their effect, i.e., their appropri-
ator, the pot. Candrakīrti asserts that to speak of this latter instance as metaphorical
designation is misinformed because there is simply no recipient for the transference:
contrary to unhappy birth in the world which is able to receive the qualifier “happy,"
an (existing but) imperceptible pot separate from blue, etc., the imperceptibility of
which would be sublated by perceptibility (pratyakṣatva), does not exist. See also the
explanation in Arnold 2005b: 451, n. 140.
66
The final Sanskrit sentence in Candrakīrti's PsP response has been simplified by Pa
tshab: [a thing] called pot that is apratyakṣa is also(? yang) not apprehended
separately . .” He has turned the negative existence statement into a negative
predication; it is unlikely that he and his collaborators had a different Sanskrit text.
PSP Tib: bum pa mngon sum zhes bya ba 'dir ni gang zhig btags nas mngon sum nyid
du 'gyur ba bum pa zhes bya ba mngon sum ma yin pa logs shig tu dmigs pa yang ma
yin no ||.
510
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 123) translates the reason upacaryamāṇasyāśrayasyābhāvāt
as "because there exists no base [such as colour] that is transferred." āśrayasya refers
to pot, not colour, and upacaryamāṇasya is its adjectival attribute, taken not in the
sense of "which is being metaphorically applied" but rather “to which something is
metaphorically applied." Arnold (2005b: 451) translates imprecisely with "since
there is no basis which is being figuratively described." Seyfort Ruegg also translates
hi of the following clause as “indeed” but here it is used in its common sense of
indicating a reason.270
etc., as well do not exist separately from earth (pṛthivī), etc., that the
perceptibility of blue, etc., is also metaphorical?511
TRANSLATION
As it is stated [in the Catuhśataka]:
Just as a pot does not exist separately from the visible, etc.,
So does the visible not exist separately from wind, etc.5¹2
511 Candrakīrti points out that when Dignāga insists on an analytical approach to
surface-level things like pots which takes them as not existing as anything beyond
their blue colour, etc., and thus deems them “perceptible" only by way of the meta-
phorical transfer of the perceptibility of their basis (i.e., the visible blue colour, etc.),
consistency demands that Dignāga also regard the blue colour, etc., as only meta-
phorically perceptible, because the blue colour, etc., like the pot, do not exist as
anything different from their basis. This challenges Dignāga's (surface-level) view
that sense data, i.e., svalakṣaṇas such as blue colour, really exist and are directly per-
ceptible. He maintains that visual sense data like blue are not conceptual
constructions, i.e., not mere designations made in dependence on molecules con-
sisting of the elements and their derivatives, but are visible aggregations of atoms,
i.e., aggregations of atoms (structured into molecules) of the elements and their
derivatives. See PSV ad I.4cd (Steinkellner 2005: 2): anekadravyotpādyatvāt tat
svāyatane sāmānyaviṣayam uktam, na tu bhinneșv abhedakalpanāt. Hypothetical
Dignāga's quirky application of metaphorical usage to the result of his misplaced
surface-level analysis of pots would thus lead to serious consequences for his system.
According to the AK, the things of the world are made up of molecules which are
minimally composed of one atom of each of the four elements, viz., earth, water, fire
and wind-which within the Buddhist schools are no longer viewed, as in, e.g., the
Vaiseșika school, as substantial bearers of their qualities, but as qualities themselves,
thus solidity, moistness, heat and movement and one atom of each of the four types
of derivative (bhautika) matter (previously the qualities "borne" by the primary
elements), viz., olfactory, gustatory, visible, and tangible matter. Only aggregates of
the molecules are perceived; individual atoms and individual molecules are not
visible. See AK I.12, II.22, 65; Frauwallner 1959: 97f.; May 1959: 88, n. 184, 91, n.
189; Tillemans 1990: 251, n. 236; 279, n. 386-7.
Siderits (1981: 150ff.) suggests that Candrakīrti may with his PsP response be
"pointing out an inconsistency between PS I.1.4cd and Ālambanaparīkṣā” and
showing that the opponent's argument will entail his admitting "what is universally
denied, namely that atoms are perceived." I do not think that Candrakīrti intends any
of this with his response, especially because he would be aware that the explanation
in the PS relies on the Sautrāntika view of atoms and their perceptibility, whereas the
Ālambanaparīkṣā argues from a Yogācāra standpoint for the impossibility of the
perception of external things.
512 Candrakīrti is quoting CŚ XIV.15: rūpādivyatirekeṇa yathā kumbho na vidyate |
vāyvādivyatirekeṇa tathā rūpam na vidyate ||. Cf. Lang 1986: 131. Cited in MABhed271
Therefore, because such worldly usage (i.e., ghataḥ pratyakṣaḥ) is not
included by [your] definition (lakṣaṇa), the definition unequivocally
has insufficient extension. Of course, from the point of view of an
[individual who] knows true reality (tattvavid), [it] is not maintained
that pot, etc., and blue, etc., are pratyakṣa; from the point of view of
worldly convention, however, [it] definitely has to be accepted that
pot, etc., are pratyakṣa.513
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
224.9-11; cf. MABh 1911: 274f. Candrakīrti comments on the verse in his CŚȚ
(CŚȚed 340.11-13) as follows: rūpādivyatirekeṇa yathā kumbho na siddhaḥ {|} evam
kumbhaprajñaptyupādānā api rūpādayo vāyvādimahābhūtacatuṣṭayavyatirekeṇa na
yujyante | nirhetukatvaprasaṁgāt |. “Just as a pot is not established separately from
visible form, etc., so too are visible form, etc., the appropriated bases of the designa-
tion pot, not tenable [as things] separate from the four elements, wind and so forth,
due to the consequence that [the visible form, etc., would thereby be] without a
cause."
tr
513 Candrakīrti also argues for the world's view of pratyakṣa in his CŚȚ, declaring
that it is illogical to reject worldly conventions when one is speaking from the
worldly point of view. Cf. CŚȚTed 67.4-7: de'i phyir de ltar 'jig rten pa'i tha snyad
gnas pa yin (sic) dang jig rten kho na las bum pa mngon sum mo zhes bya bar brjod
par rigs kyi | rang bzhin tshol ba'i dus su de nyid rig pas de skad du smra bar 'os pa
ma yin te | bum pa’i rang gi ngo bo rnam pa thams cad du ma dmigs pa'i phyir ro ||.
Tillemans translates (CŚȚ₁ 178): "So then, as there is a worldly convention [for
objects being pratyakṣa], then just because of the world it is correct to say that a vase
is pratyakṣa. But should one look for any nature, then he who understands the truth
cannot make this type of an assertion, for in no respect is any nature of a vase
perceived.” Candrakīrti continues by saying that for the world, a pot, visual form,
etc., and what is appropriated by the visual form (as upādāyarūpa), i.e., aggregations
of atomic molecules, are accepted as pratyakṣa: 'jig rten pa'i rnam par shes pa la ni
bum pa la yang mngon sum yin zhing gzugs la sogs pa dag kyang mngon sum yin la
de'i nye bar len pa rnams kyang mngon sum yin pas nyes pa med do|| (CST Ted 67.7-
9); Tillemans translates (CŚT 178): "For a worldly consciousness vases are
pratyakṣa (i.e., perceptible), (visual) form and the like are also pratyakṣa and the
material causes (nye bar len pa = upādāna) of such [things] are pratyakṣa too. Thus
there is no fault (here)." Thus Candrakīrti, in contradistinction to the PsP's hypothe-
tical Dignāga, does not maintain that a pot (or visible form) is only metaphorically
designated pratyakṣa. For Candrakīrti “situated on the side of the world," a pot, as
appropriator, exists (cp. the earlier case of Rāhu and pestle), and is as much a
perceptible thing as that which it appropriates. At CŚred 62.8-16, he explains that
even though pots do not ultimately exist, on the worldly level they are held to be
established and perceptible: 'byung ba chen po bzhi dang rgyur byas pa’i gzugs bzhi
ste | rdzas brgyad po de dag la brten nas bum pa 'dogs te | ji ltar bud shing la brten272
TRANSLATION
tr
nas me dang | rtswa dang shing la sogs pa la brten nas khyim dang phung po dag la
brten nas bdag tu 'dogs la de yang rang gi rgyu las rnam pa lngas btsal na ma dmigs
pa de bzhin du rang gi rgyu la brten nas sbrang rtsi dang chu dang 'o ma 'chu zhing
'dzin par nus pa mthong ba'i dbang pos go bar bya ba yin pas 'jig rten gyi mngon
sum du gyur pa’i bum pa nye bar len pa po nyid du rnam par gzhag gi | ji skad bshad
pa'i brten nas btags pa 'di khas ma blangs par rtog pa gzhan gyis bum par rnam par
gzhag par nus pa ni ma yin no ||. Tillemans translates (CŚT 175f.): "The vase is de-
signated in dependence (brten nas 'dogs pa = upādāya prajñapti) upon the eight
substances (rdzas = dravya), i.e. the four elements ('byung ba chen po = mahābhūta)
and the four [types] of form which depend upon [the elements]. Just as fire is
designated in dependence on fuel, houses in dependence upon grass and wood, and
the self in dependence upon the aggregrates, but if one searches [for these entities]
among their causes by means of the fivefold [reasoning] one will not perceive them,
so too a vase, which is something perceptible for the world because it is understood
by the sense faculty which sees that it can scoop up honey, water and milk, is
established in dependence on its causes as being the appropriator (nye bar len pa po
= upādātṛ) [of the eight substances]. However, rival conceptions, which do not hold
that [things] are dependently designated as just explained, are unable to establish
[anything] as being a vase."
=
Cf. also CŚTTed 63.5-10, the last part of Candrakīrti's response to opponents who
have argued that things like pots are not perceived separately from visible form, etc.,
and are thus completely imagined: de’i phyir bum pa la sogs pa rnams sems dang
sems las byung ba lta bu dang | 'byung ba chen po bzhin du rten cing 'brel par 'byung
ba 'am brten nas btags par ci ste khas mi len te de'i phyir bum pa rdzas brgyad kyi
nye bar len pa can rang gi nye bar blangs pa’i nye bar len pa por gyur cing nye bar
len pa'i bya ba byed pa po 'jig rten gyi mngon sum du gyur pa’i yan lag can de Itar
rnam par gnas pa yin dang 'di rnam par dpyad de . Tillemans translates (CŚȚ„ 176):
"Therefore, why don't they accept that vases, just like the mind and the mental or the
elements, are dependent arisings or [in other words] are dependently designated? So
the vase, which has the eight substances as substrata, is the appropriator of what it
appropriates, and the agent of the action of appropriation (nye bar len pa'i bya ba);
the whole, which is something perceptible for the world, exists in this manner, [but]
should one analyse it ... ."
tr273
$112. 514Furthermore, because the word pratyaksa denotes objects that
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Ted
tr
514 Antecedent to this sentence, Ms Q and the four paper manuscripts collated attest
the introductory words yathoktam śatake, which are followed by two verses, namely,
CŚ XIII.1 and XIII.2 and a final closing iti: (CŚ XIII.1) sarva eva ghato 'drsto rūpe
dṛṣṭe hi jāyate | brūyāt kas tattvavin nama ghaṭaḥ pratyakṣa ity api || (CŚ XIII.2)
etenaiva vicāreņa sugandhi madhuram mrdu | pratiṣedhayitavyāni sarvāṇy
uttamabuddhinā || iti (for CŚ XIII.1, cf. CŚȚ₁ 61 and CŚT 175; Lang 1986: 118;
for CŚ XIII.2, cf. CŚTTed 68 and CŚT 179; Lang 1986: 118f.). PsP Tib attests a
translation for the introduction and for both verses, and closes with zhes bshad do ||.
PsP₁ naturally includes the Sanskrit text. Ms P, however, lacks the introduction, both
of the verses and the final iti. Given that ms Q contains interpolated material that it
has passed on to the paper manuscripts and the fact that the Tibetan translation has
also incorporated interpolated readings from a manuscript in Q's line (see Stemma),
ms P's non-attestation of the verses demands attention. I do not include the two
verses in my edition because I am convinced that they were not included by Candra-
kīrti and rather represent later additions—they were possibly originally marginal
notes—made by a scholar studying or teaching this chapter of the PSP. My reasons
are as follows. First, it is difficult to explain ms P's non-attestation of the material as
due to scribal error, because a hypothesis in this direction is not paleographically
supported. I initially wondered if an eyeskip might have occurred from nā of ghaṭā-
dīnām (last word of the sentence before Q and the paper manuscripts' yathoktam
śatake) to nā of uttamabuddhinā (last word of the second CŚ verse), but rejected this
idea because ms P does not attest the citation-closing iti after uttamabuddhinā, which
certainly would have been copied if we are merely dealing with an eyeskip. Ms Q
and the four paper manuscripts further meld uttamabuddhinā and iti via sandhi to
read uttamabuddhineti (the coalescing of the final word/compound in a quotation
with the closing iti is common in the manuscripts), which makes a nā to nā eyeskip
impossible. Second, when one considers Candrakīrti's discussion and the point he is
making, it becomes obvious that the two verses simply do not belong in the text. The
two verses translate (CŚ XIII.1:) “The entire pot is of course unseen when the visible
(rūpa) is seen. What knower of reality (tattvavid) would also say, 'The pot is
perceptible'?” (CŚ XIII.2:) “With this very analysis the fragrant, the sweet, the
soft-all [of these]—should be refuted by one of superior intelligence.” It is true that
Candrakīrti refers to knowers of reality (tattvavid) in the prose of the sentence
immediately before ms Q's CŚ verses and to the fact that from the vantage point of
the ultimate level, on which no things whatsoever exist, pots are naturally not pratya-
kṣa, but this is merely intended as a tipping of the hat to the final viewpoint, for
Candrakīrti is by no means interested in instructing Dignāga in ultimate analyses that
deny the perceptibility of pots. Throughout the entire previous section he has been
pressing home to Dignāga that when he deals with the samvṛti level, the level of
everyday discourse, he has to accept-especially because Dignāga maintains that he
does accept everyday conceptual and linguistic practice—that pots are pratyakṣa.
Within this context it would indeed be counterproductive for Candrakīrti to cite274
are not beyond the ken of the senses (aparokṣa), an object (artha)
accessible to the sense (akṣābhimukha) is pratyakṣa. In consideration
of [the fact that the compound word pratyakṣa is etymologized as]
"this [is what] the sense has gone toward" (pratigatam akşam
asmin),5¹5 it becomes established that [objects] not beyond the ken of
the senses-pots, blue, and so forth-are pratyakṣa.516 The cognition
TRANSLATION
verses which argue for the non-existence of pots. I expect that an individual engaged
in studying or teaching the PsP's first chapter copied the two CŚ verses into the
margin because the talk of pots and knowers of reality brought them to mind (they
would certainly be worthy of a digression in a teaching situation) and that a later
scribe assumed that the verses and CŚ ascription belonged to the main text, and thus
copied the marginalia into it. The addition of the citation must have occurred
sometime before the late eleventh century for it have been attested in one or both of
the manuscripts relied upon by Pa tshab and his collaborators. The two CŚ verses
were also present in the PsP manuscript relied upon by *LȚ's author given that he
comments on the words madhuram and mṛdu: madhuram iti rasaḥ | mṛdu iti sparśaḥ ||
(cf. Yonezawa 2004: 125, 146 [fol. 3a1]).
tr
Candrakīrti explains api of CŚ XIII.1's final pāda as indicating the inclusion of the
blue colour as well as the other substances in the question (cf. CŚȚTed 60.16-17 and
CŚT 175). Arnold (2005b: 452) translates CŚ XIII.1 as: "The whole jar, unseen, is
present even when only its color is seen." jāyate (Arnold's “is present") has instead
the meaning "occurs," i.e., the pot occurs as something unseen, i.e., is not seen; Pa
tshab renders adṛṣṭo jāyate with mthong mi 'gyur.
515 With his presentation of the etymology pratigatam akṣam asmin (literally
"towards this the sense has gone") Candrakīrti reveals that he endorses the interpreta-
tion of the word pratyakṣa which considers it to be a bahuvrīhi, specifically a prādi
bahuvrihi, the more standard dissolution of which would be pratigatam akşam
yasmin.
PsP Tib presents 'di la dbang po mngon du phyogs pas for pratigatam akṣam asminn
iti kṛtvā. Pa tshab justifiably employs mngon du phyogs pa instead of a literal
equivalent for pratigata because the Tibetan word being etymologized is mngon sum
(an etymology with mngon appearing in it is thus expected). The idea is not—at least
not according to the Buddhist conception of sense perception that the sense literally
departs from its āśraya and "goes" anywhere, but that the sense has "gone toward"
(pratigata) the object in that it is "turned toward" it (mngon du phyogs pa), i.e., takes
the object as its focus.
516 The view that pratyakṣa refers to the object and not to cognition, or only
secondarily to cognition, is found in other works. Schmithausen draws attention to
the fact that the AS's definition of pratyakṣa has to be understood as referring to the
object. The AS definition is: pratyakṣam svasatprakāśābhrānto ’rthaḥ. Schmithausen
(1972: 161) translates, “[The means of proof (sādhanam) consisting in] what is
directly perceived (pratyakṣam) is an object (arthaḥ) which is proper [to thePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
275
(jñāna) that discerns them is [secondarily] designated pratyakṣa,
because [it] has as its cause the pratyakṣa [objects], [just] as a grass
[fire] and a chaff fire [have as their respective causes grass and chaff
and are accordingly named after them].5
517
respective sense-faculty] (sva-), [really] existent (sat-), manifest (prakāśa-), and non-
erroneous (abhrānta-)." He translates the ASBh's comments as follows (ibid., 159):
"In this [definition of pratyakṣam], 'its own object' (svo 'rthaḥ) is, for example, the
visible in the case of the sense of sight. [The attribute] ‘real' (sat-) is used in order to
state that things like pot etc. which in ordinary life are considered to be pratyakṣa-
are not pratyakṣa- [in reality] because they are mere denominations. [The attribute]
'manifest' (prakāśa-) is used in order to exclude objects (viṣaya-) which are not in
the range of sight on account of being hidden or [on account of] any other cause of
non-perception. [The attribute] 'non-erroneous' (abhranta-) is used in order to
exclude [erroneous objects] like a wheel [manifested by brandishing] a fire-brand, a
magical apparition, or a mirage” (ASBh 152.27-30: tatra svo 'rthas tadyathā cakṣușo
rūpam | sadgrahaṇam ghaṭādidravyāṇām loke pratyakṣasammatānām pratyakṣatva-
vyudāsārtham prajñaptimātratvāt | prakāśagrahaṇam āvṛtatvādibhir anupalabdhi-
kāraṇair anābhāsagataviṣayavyudāsārtham | abhrāntagrahaṇam alātacakramāyā-
marīcikādivyudāsārtham iti ||). Schmithausen further records a presentation which
associates pratyakṣa with the object at Carakasamhitā III.8.39: pratyakṣam nāma tad
yad ātmanā pañcendriyaiś ca svayam upalabhyate; tatrātmapratyakṣāḥ sukha-
duḥkhecchadveṣādayaḥ, śabdādayas tv indriyapratyakṣāḥ; he translates (ibid., 160),
"pratyakşam (= directly perceived) is that which is perceived by oneself through the
soul and the five sense faculties. [Psychical qualities] like pleasure, pain, desire or
aversion are directly perceived through the soul; [exterior objects] like sound are
pratyakṣa (= directly perceived) through the sense faculties." Schmithausen (ibid.,
161) notes, "Still more important is the fact that our explanation of the definition of
pratyakṣam in the AS is also supported by the main source on which the AS is based,
viz. the Yogācārabhūmiḥ. This text contains a chapter on the theory of discussion in
which (as in the AS which obviously has made use of this chapter) pratyakṣam is dis-
cussed among the means of proof” (sādhanāni), and there are at least two passages
in which pratyakṣam is clearly defined as the object perceived: 1) Ym 97b4 = ŚrBhm
2A.8-5f.: anabhyūhitam anabhyūhyam pratyakṣam katamat? yo grahaṇamātra-
prasiddhopalabdhyāśrayo viṣayaḥ, yaś ca viṣayapratisthitopalabdhyāśrayo viṣayaḥ
and 2) Y 98a5 = ŚrBh 2B.8-6: rūpīndriyapratyakṣam katamat? rūpiņām pañcānām
indriyāṇām yo gocaro viṣayaḥ." He concludes, "Thus, in the AS pratyakṣam differs
from the other 'means of proof' (sādhanāni) in so far as the object itself is the means
of the proof of its existence or of its special character .
m
517 *LȚ's author explains the example of grass and chaff fire by stating that the chaff
itself when it is burned is (metaphorically) called "fire": yathā tuṣa eva dagdho 'gnir
ity ucyate (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 125, 147 [correct his tu sa to tușa] [fol. 3a1]). Arnold
(2005b: 453, n. 145) rightly critiques Seyfort Ruegg for having wrongly understood
the first three sentences as expressing the view of the opponent, i.e., Dignāga (cf.276
§113. The etymology, on the other hand, of the one (= Dignāga) who
etymologizes the word pratyakṣa as "[cognition that] occurs with
regard to the respective senses" (akṣam akşam prati vartate) is not
correct,518 because cognition does not have the sense faculty as object
TRANSLATION
Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 124, n. 231). The first three sentences of the PsP passage are
also translated in Siderits 1981: 152, Tillemans 1990: 277, n. 374 and Thakchoe
2010: 107 (the Sanskrit of the PSP passages presented in Thakchoe's footnotes is
unreliable).
999
518 Dignāga's etymology is attested in his commentary on NM 15. The TSP preserves
the Sanskrit of the sentence containing the etymology: tatrāyam nyāyamukhagra-
nthaḥ yat jñānārtharūpādau (read: yaj jñānam arthe rūpādau) viśeṣaṇābhidhāya-
kābhedopacāreṇāvikalpakam tad akṣam akṣam prati vartata iti pratyakṣam (TSP 456,
ad TS kārikā 1236; see Tucci 1930: 50 and n. 85; Katsura 1982: 84; Tillemans 1990:
274, n. 367); the Sanskrit (beginning with yat) translates: "The cognition in regard to
an object such as visible form which is without conceptuality through superimpos-
ition of an identity [of the object] with a qualification (jāti, etc.) or a denomination is
pratyakṣa, [etymologized as] [it] occurs with regard to the respective senses.
Tillemans' (1990: 274, n. 367) translation from the Chinese of the NM is slightly dif-
ferent. Jinendrabuddhi, commenting on PS 1.3c (pratyakṣam kalpanāpoḍham) re-
marks that pratyakṣa is a prādi compound; he states (cf. Steinkellner et al. 2005: 37):
pratyakṣam ityādi. pratigatam akṣam pratyakṣam prādisamāsaḥ. Thus for Jinendra-
buddhi, and for Dignāga, pratyakṣa is a prādi tatpuruṣa, with akşam of the vigraha
pratigatam akṣam pratyakṣam understood as an accusative. The word is placed in the
neuter gender because it modifies jñāna. Cf. also the grammatical explanation given
by Dharmottara in the Nyāyabinduṭīkā as presented and translated in Kajiyama 1998:
29, n. 23.
The view that the compound word pratyakṣa is a prādi tatpuruṣa is documented in
other Indian texts. The Nyāyapraveśa presents the same etymology as Dignāga: tatra
pratyakṣam kalpanāpoḍham yaj jñānam arthe rūpādau nāmajāṭyādikalpanārahitam
tat | akṣam akṣam prati vartata iti pratyakṣam (see Tachikawa 1971: 144; Katsura
1982: 84). See also Hattori 1968: 76, n. 1.11. Uddyotakara, like Jinendrabuddhi, ex-
plicitly states that pratyakṣa is a prādi tatpuruṣa. He notes that Pakṣilasvāmin has
presented it in the NBh as an avyayībhāva (akṣasyākṣasya prativiṣayam vṛttiḥ pratya-
kşam "the functioning of the respective senses in regard to each object"), but that he
has done so only to explain the intent of the sutra, i.e., to indicate the distributive
sense intended. But since the genitive akṣasya cannot be used in the explanation of an
avyayībhāva that would end in akṣam, Uddyotakara asserts that pratyakṣa is properly
a prādisamāsa, to be analyzed as pratigatam akṣam (“gone toward the sense”) similar
to the prādisamāsa upaguḥ "near cows" which is analyzed as upagato gobhiḥ
"approached by / furnished with cows" (NV 26.15-18: akṣasyākṣasya prativiṣayam
vṛttiḥ pratyakṣam iti ayam ca sūtravivakṣāyām avyavībhāvaḥ samāsaḥ | anyathā tu
vastunirdeso na samāsaḥ | samāse hi akṣasyeti şaṣṭī na śrūyeta | kaḥ punar atraPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
277
(vişaya) and because [cognition] takes as its object the object
(visaya); [thus the word Dignāga uses should not be pratyakṣa], but
should [instead] be prativiṣaya or pratyartha [and his corrected ety-
mology should read visayam viṣayam prati vartate or artham artham
prati vartate “(cognition that) occurs with regard to the respective
objects"],519
§114. But if there were [this objection:] For example, even though
consciousness proceeds in dependence on both [the object and the
basis (āśraya), i.e., the sense],520 since consciousnesses undergo mod-
ification through the modification of those [bases] (tadvikāravikāri-
tvāt) on account of the fact that they conform to the sharpness or
dullness (patumandatānuvidhānāt) of the basis (aśraya), there is
designation only in terms of the basis-[thus the designation] “visual
samāsaḥ? prādisamāso 'yam drṣṭavyaḥ pratigatam akṣam pratyakṣam iti yathopagato
gobhir upagur iti). For these and other interpretations of the compound pratyakṣa,
see Sharma 1985.
519 Candrakīrti rejects Dignāga's prādi tatpuruṣa interpretation of the compound
pratyakṣa on the grounds that its focus is confused and rectification of the mistake
would momentously and preposterously require changing the name of this fundamen-
tal pramāṇa of the Indian schools from pratyakṣa to prativiṣaya or pratyartha.
In the PSV introduction to PS I.4ab, Dignāga has an interlocutor ask the question
why pratyakṣa, given that it is dependent on both the sense and the object, is not
called prativiṣaya. Dignāga responds in PS I.4ab that it is named after its specific
cause: atha kasmād dvayādhīnāyām utpattau pratyakṣam ucyate na prativiṣayam (PS
I.4ab:) asādhāraṇahetutvād akṣais tad vyapadiśyate | (PSV:) na tu viṣayai rūpādibhiḥ
(cf. Steinkellner 2005: 2; Hattori 1968: 25f.; 86, n. 1.31 and 87, n. 1.32). Candrakīrti
will make reference to this response in Dignāga's next PSP objection.
For partial or complete translations of the paragraph, see Stcherbatsky 1927: 159;
Siderits 1981: 152; Tillemans 1990: 277, n. 374; Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 125; Arnold
2005b: 452f.; Thakchoe 2010: 107). Arnold (2005b: 454, n. 149) notes that Seyfort
Ruegg's (2002: 125f.) translation of the final part of the sentence as "But let there
stand [the expression] prativiṣayam, or [the expression] pratyartham" indicates that
Seyfort Ruegg takes this statement to be Candrakīrti's preferred account. It should be
added that Seyfort Ruegg (ibid., 126, n. 234) calls attention to PsP Tib's negative
construction yul so so ba 'am don so so ba nyid ces bya bar ni mi 'gyur ro ||, possibly
because he was disturbed by the Sanskrit as he had interpreted it.
520 *LT's author notes that "both" refers to the sense faculty and the object:
ubhayādhīnendriyaviṣayau (read: ubhayādhīnetīndriyaᵒ?) (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 125,
147 [fol. 3a1]).TRANSLATION
consciousness."52¹ Similarly, even if [it does] occur with regard to the
respective objects (artham artham prati vartate), consciousness,
which occurs based on the respective senses (akṣam akṣam āśritya),
will nonetheless be what is called pratyakṣa because there is designa-
tion in terms of the basis. For it is observed [in the world] that there is
designation by way of the specific (asādhāraṇa) cause [for example,]
kettledrum sound (bherisabdo) [and] barley sprout (yavānkura),
[which are named after their specific causes, not after any of their
causes common to other things].522
278
521 The reason why the six consciousnesses are named after their respective senses,
and not after their objects, is explained in AK I.45: tadvikāravikāritvād āśrayāś
cakṣurādayaḥ | ato 'sādhāraṇatvāc ca vijñānam tair nirucyate (AKBhd's ato 'sādha-
raṇatvād hi [the ms reading] has been corrected following AKBh¡, which corrects on
the basis of AKVy. AKBh 34.25 expects ca). Vasubandhu comments (AKBhed 34.20-
22; AKBh; 54.21-23; AKBhÅ 1.96): cakṣurādīnām hi vikāreṇa tadvijñānānām vikāro
bhavaty anugrahopaghātapaṭumandatānuvidhānāt | na tu rūpādīnām vikāreṇa tadvi-
kāraḥ | tasmāt sādhīyas tadadhīnatvāt ta evāśrayā na rūpādayaḥ. See also AKVy
87.2-17 for a discussion focussed on the compound anugrahopaghātapaṭumanda-
tānuvidhānāt, in which it is stated that no matter how clear the object might be, if the
visual sense faculty is affected by jaundice, timira or old age, the visual conscious-
ness will also be affected. PsP Dignāga's introductory words ubhayādhīnāyām api
vijñānapravṛttau call to mind his PSV formulation dvayādhīnāyām utpattau (lead-in
to PS I.4ab) but also remind one of ubhayādhīnāyām vijñānotpattau of the AKBh
sentence leading into AK I.45ab: kim punaḥ kāraṇam ubhayādhīnāyām vijñānotpa-
ttau cakṣurādaya evāśrayā ucyante na rūpādayaḥ. The question of why visual con-
sciousness is named after the sense, and not after the object, is inspired by the
frequently encountered statement attributed to the historical Buddha that visual con-
sciousness arises in dependence on [both] the visual faculty and visible form
(cakkhum ca paṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhuviññāṇam; SN II.72ff., passim). See
Hattori 1968: 86, n. 1.31.
Arnold (2005b: 454) takes the two reasons to stand in apposition, the second
elucidating the content of the first (“Even given that the functioning of perceptual
cognition (vijñāna) is dependent upon both [the sense faculty and an object], it is
based on conformity with the acuity of the basis (āśraya)—i.e., because perceptual
cognitions have the quality of changing as that [basis] changes that there is
designation [of the epistemic faculty] precisely in terms of the basis [thereof]"), but I
understand the first as giving the reason for the second; this interpretation is
supported by the AKBh ad AK 1.45ab: cakṣurādīnām hi vikāreṇa tadvijñānānām
vikāro bhavaty anugrahopaghātapaṭumandatānuvidhānāt | (AKBhed 34.20-21;
AKBhE; 54.21-22).
522 Candrakīrti's sentence dṛṣto hy asādhāraṇena vyapadeśo bherīśabdo yavānkura iti
closely echoes PSV ad PS I.4ab (Steinkellner 2005: 2): asādhāraṇena ca vyapadesoPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
279
[Reply:] This [case of pratyakṣa] is not the same as the previous
[concerning the designation of consciousness]. For there [in the case
of consciousness], if consciousness were designated in terms of the
drsto yathā bherīśabdo yavānkura iti (cf. Hattori 1968: 87, n. 1.33; see also
Jinendrabuddhi's comments in Steinkellner et al. 2005: 39f.). Dignāga asserts in PS
I.4ab that pratyakṣa is named after the sense because the sense is its specific cause:
asādhāraṇahetutvād akṣais tad vyapadiśyate, explaining in PSV (Steinkellner 2005:
2): tathā hi viṣayā manovijñānānyasantānikavijñānasādhāraṇāḥ | asādhāraṇena ca
vyapadeso drsto yathā bherīśabdo yavānkura iti “To explain, objects are common to
consciousnesses belonging to the continuum of another [person] and to mental con-
sciousness; and designation by way of the specific [cause] is observed [in everyday
life], as [in the cases of] ‘kettledrum sound' and 'barley sprout'." The reason *asā-
dhāraṇahetutvāt is attested also in NM ad 15ab; see Tucci 1930: 50; Hattori 1968:
87, n. 1.32; Katsura 1982: 84; Tillemans 1990: 274, n. 367. The point of reference is
AK 1.45cd: ato 'sādhāraṇatvāc ca vijñānam̃ tair nirucyate and AKBh ad AK I.45cd
(AKBhed 34.27-30; corrected on the basis of AKBhå¡ 55.3-6, see AKBh… 1.96): na hi
cakṣur anyasya vijñānasyāśrayībhavitum utsahate rūpam tu manovijñānasyāla-
mbanībhavaty anyacakṣurvijñānasyāpīti ... tasmād āśrayabhāvād asādhāraṇatvāc ca
vijñānam tair eva nirdiśyate na rūpādibhiḥ | yathā bherīśabdo yavāṁkura iti "For it is
not the case that the eye is able to become the base for another consciousness. Visible
form, on the other hand, becomes the object support for mental consciousness as well
as for another visual consciousness. Therefore, due to the existence of the basis
and because [the basis] is the specific [cause], consciousness is indicated by way of
those [bases], not by way of visual form, etc. [It is] the same as ‘kettledrum sound'
[and] 'barley sprout' [being named after their respective specific causes]." Yaśomitra
explains in the AKVy that one speaks of a “kettledrum sound," not a “stick-sound,"
because a stick is the instrument for a paṭaha-drum, etc., as well; and one speaks of a
"barley sprout," not a “field sprout," because a field is the common [cause] also for a
rice sprout and a wheat sprout; AKVy 87.24-26: asādhāraṇatvāt tābhyām
bherīyavābhyām yathā nirdeśo loke bherīśabdo yavāṇkura iti na tu dandaśabdaḥ kṣe-
trāmkura iti vā | daṇḍo hi paṭahādiśabdasyāpi kāraṇībhavet. kṣetram ca śāligodhū-
māmkurasyāpīti sādhāraṇatvāt na tābhyāṇ nirdeśaḥ kriyate |.
Hattori (1968: 87, n. 1.33) criticizes Candrakīrti for relying on the first reason given
in the AK (= AK I.45ab) to explain why consciousness is named after the sense and
then inappropriately employing the examples kettledrum sound and barley sprout, the
examples used by Dignāga and Vasubandhu in support of the second reason (= AK
I.45cd). This critique is misplaced. Candrakīrti's Dignāga presents Vasubandhu's ex-
planation (i.e., AK I.45ab) as to why visual consciousness is named after the sense as
a point of comparison for the case of pratyakṣa. The conclusion in the case of con-
sciousness is that consciousness is designated by way of its basis. This conclusion is
then applied to the case of pratyakṣa (āśrayeṇa vyapadeśāt), and the reason Dignāga
actually uses in PS (= AK I.45cd), together with its examples, is presented.
The passage is discussed briefly in Siderits 1981: 152f. See also Seyfort Ruegg 2002:
126f. and Arnold 2005b: 454f.280
TRANSLATION
object (viṣaya), a differentiation (bheda) of the six-fold consciousness
(vijñānaṣaṭka) could not be indicated by way of [expressions] like
"visible-form consciousness" (rūpavijñāna), because mental con-
sciousness occurs with regard to the same object as visual conscious-
ness, etc.523 To explain: When [someone,] with respect to the six-fold
consciousness of blue and so forth,524 utters [the word] "conscious-
ness," an expectant thought arises [in the mind of the hearer, viz.,]
"Has this consciousness arisen from a material sense faculty (rū-
pindriyaja) or is it a mental (manasa) [consciousness]?"525 However
523 The objects of the senses are also perceived by mental consciousness. Cf. AK
I.48a: pañca bāhyā dvivijñeyāḥ and its commentary (AKBhed 36.24-25; AKBh£j
57.16-20): rūpaśabdagandharasaspraṣṭavyadhātavo yathāsamkhyam cakṣuḥśrotra-
ghrāṇajihvākāyavijñānair anubhūtā manovijñānena vijñāyante | evam ete pratyekam
dvābhyām vijñānābhyām vijñeyā bhavanti | śeṣās trayodaśa dhātavaḥ pañcānām
vijñānakāyānām aviṣayatvād ekena manovijñānena vijñeyā ity ākhyātam bhavati (the
thirteen dhātus perceived only by manovijñāna are the six senses, the six conscious-
nesses, and the dharmadhātu). Candrakīrti accordingly asserts that mental conscious-
ness takes as its object the same object apprehended earlier by the preceding visual,
auditory, etc., consciousness; cf. CŚTed 292.10-12: iha cakṣuḥ pratītya rūpam ca
cakṣurvijñānam utpadya nirudhyamāṇam sahendriyaviṣayair nirudhyate | tasmin
niruddhe pūrvadṛṣṭo yo ʼrthaḥ sa eva paścān manasā gṛhyate | (see CŚTr 193).
Nagatomi (1979: 253) writes, “Mano-vijñāna, as traditionally understood, is capable
of cognizing objects that are not amenable to indriya-jñāna, and involves emotive
and conceptual elements."
mānasapratyakṣa of Dignāga's system is modelled after manovijñāna but does not
involve conceptuality. mānasapratyakṣa is described in PS I.6ab as akalpaka and in
PSV as avikalpaka; PSV ad PS I.6ab (Steinkellner 2005: 3): mānasam api rūpādi-
viṣayālambanam avikalpakam anubhavākārapravṛttam ... . Hattori (1968: 27) trans-
lates: "The mental [perception] which, taking a thing of color, etc., for its object, oc-
curs in the form of immediate experience (anubhava) is also free from conceptual
construction ..." (see also ibid., 93, n. 1.46). On mānasapratyakṣa, see, e.g., Naga-
tomi 1979; Kobayashi 2010. On later discussions on mānasapratyakṣa, see Tillemans
1989 and 1990: 286, n. 428.
524 The expression nīlādivijñānaṣatke in the present context is somewhat unusual
one expects rūpādiº instead of the much more specific nīlādiº. The manuscript read-
ings diverge at this point and I have not been able to come up with a better solution
than de La Vallée Poussin's nīlādivijñānaṣatke.
525 As stated, the object apprehended by mental consciousness is the object that has
been apprehended by the preceding sense consciousness. Were consciousness to be
designated in reliance on its object, with the result that consciousness of, e.g., sound
and odour would be termed "sound consciousness" and "odour consciousness," notPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
281
when there is designation in terms of the basis (āśraya), even given
the possibility of mental [consciousness] occurring with respect to the
object of a visual consciousness, etc., the difference [of the con-
sciousnesses] from each other ends up [clearly] established. But here
[in the case of pratyakṣa], when [you] with a view to asserting def-
initions for the means of valid cognition (pramāṇalakṣaṇa) maintain
that only [consciousness] devoid of conceptuality (kalpanapoḍha) 526
is pratyakṣa, [then,] because that [sort of consciousness] is admitted
[by you] to be different exclusively from conceptual [consciousness]
(vikalpaka), [we] do not see any point in there being527 designation in
terms of the specific cause [since no ambiguity exists between the
two types of consciousnesses which might be clarified thereby].³²
528
"auditory consciousness" or "olfactory consciousness," one would not know, upon
hearing the assertion "sound consciousness," whether the consciousness indicated
would be an auditory consciousness, i.e., one reliant on the auditory sense, or the
mental consciousness of a sound initially perceived by the auditory sense.
526 Candrakīrti refers to Dignāga's definition of pratyakṣa as presented in PS I.3c:
pratyakşam kalpanapoḍham. See n. 444.
527 Arnold (2005b: 456, n. 160) emends vyapadeśe sati to vyapadeśe, but sati occurs
in all the manuscripts and the locative absolute makes good sense. De La Vallée
Poussin (PSP₁ 73, n. 8) is not, as Arnold thinks he is, suggesting that sati ought to be
dropped; he is simply pointing out that Tib lacks it (it would anyway hardly be
expressible in Tibetan). PsP Tib reads thun mong ma yin pa'i rgyus bstan pa la for
asādhāraṇakāraṇena vyapadeśe sati.
528 Consciousness has the name of its āśraya appended to it in order to differentiate a
consciousness generated by any of the senses from mental consciousness, which
takes as its object the aspect (ākāra) of the object apprehended by the specific sense
consciousness. In the present situation concerning the etymology of pratyakṣa, how-
ever, Dignāga's aim is to set forth definitions for the various means of valid
cognition, and although this requires distinguishing them from each other, the only
distinguishing necessary in the case of pratyakṣa is the delineating of it from
conceptual consciousness. Thus given that there is no potential overlap with other
means of valid cognition, even from the point of view of Dignāga's own system there
is absolutely no benefit in or justification for relying on an etymology that connects
pratyakṣa with the senses instead of objects.
*LT's author adds to his comments on the sentence that a delineation from concep-
tuality is also established by the etymology relied upon by Candrakīrti. He writes (cf.
Yonezawa 2004: 125, 147 [fol. 3a2]): vikalpakāt (ms: vikalpyāta) sakāśāt | tadviśe-
ṣasya pratyakṣasya yo bhedas [] tasya asādhāraṇakāraṇena akṣam akṣam pra[ti]
vartate ity anena | pratigatam asminn iti vyutpat[t]yāpi vikalpād bhedaḥ siddhaḥ | (in282
TRANSLATION
And given that the occurrence (pravṛtti), as regards their number, of
means of valid cognition is dependent (paratantra) on the objects
cognized (prameya),529 and because there is the establishing of the
own-form (svarūpa) of the [two] means of valid cognition (= pra-
tyakṣa and anumāna) whose individual existence (ātmabhāvasattā)
has been reached through nothing but conformity (anukāritā) to the
[specific] form (ākāra) of the [respective] object cognized, desig-
nation in terms of sense faculty does not serve anything at all. Thus,
designation solely by way of the object is right (nyāyya) in every
respect.530
§115. If [Dignāga objects:] Since the word pratyakṣa is generally
established in [its] intended meaning in the world, and since “pra-
tyartha" is not generally established, [we] resort to an etymology just
in terms of the basis.531
Reply: It is [true] that this word pratyakṣa is generally established in
the world.532 Yet we [unlike you] really use it the way it [is used] in
contrast, Yonezawa reads the first word as vikarṇṇāt [emended to vikarṇāt] and
unnecessarily emends vyutpatyāpi to vyutpattiḥ api).
529 Cf. PS I.2ab₁ (Steinkellner 2005: 1): pratyakṣam anumānam ca pramāṇe with PSV
ad PS I.2ab₁: te dve eva yasmāt, and PS I.2b₂c₁: lakṣaṇadvayam prameyam. Arnold's
(2005b: 456) translation "function" for pravṛtti of pramāṇasankhyāpravṛttau (“given
that the function and number of reliable warrants") is not acceptable because the
function of the pramāṇas is not topical. Stcherbatsky (1927: 161, n. 2) translates,
"since the existence of the number of the sources of cognition"; Seyfort Ruegg
(2002: 128): "given that the number of pramāṇas operates."
530 Arnold (2005b: 456, n. 161) notes, “Again, Candrakīrti here accepts, ex hypothesi,
Dignāga's goals, noting that according to these one ought to want a nirukti that
etymologizes pratyakṣa in terms of its object, since the whole point of Dignāga’s
account is that pramāṇa follows/corresponds to prameya. But of course, if
Candrakīrti wins this concession, then he's well on the way to advancing the triviali-
zation of Dignāga's privileged epistemic faculty."
531 Dignāga justifies his etymology by arguing that he is merely following common
usage: the general populace relies on the word pratyakṣa, in full comprehension of its
intended meaning, and never uses the word pratyartha in its place; there thus is no
reason for Candrakīrti to insist that Dignāga should switch to pratyartha.
532 Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 129) translates, “There is this word pratyakṣa which is
current among ordinary folk in the world ... .” asti has, however, been placed at the283
the world [i.e., we relate the word to the object, not the sense].533 But
since it is etymologized [by you] by setting aside (tiraskāra) worldly
things as they stand (yathāsthita), [you] should also set aside the
generally established word [pratyakṣa]. And therefore [the word you
use] should indeed be pratyartha.
534
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
beginning of the sentence to emphasize the agreement with Dignāga's assertion (thus
my "It is [true]"). Arnold (2005b: 457) adds “indeed” to indicate the stress: "This
word 'perceptible' is indeed well-known in the world."
533 Arnold (2005b: 457, n. 164) critiques Seyfort Ruegg's (2002: 129) translation of
tu as "indeed."
534 PSP Tib at this point attests de'i phyir mngon sum zhes bya ba de ltar mi 'gyur ro
for tataś ca pratyartham ity eva syāt, which is found in all six Sanskrit manuscripts
used for this part of my edition. Relying on the Tibetan, de La Vallée Poussin
emends the reading pratyartham ity evam syāt as found in at least one of his
manuscripts (he refers to “mss.” at PsP₁ 74, n. 2; his Cambridge manuscript, my ms
L, attests eva, and not evam) to pratyakṣam ity evam [na] syāt. The reading attested in
the Cambridge manuscript and the other manuscripts used for the present edition is
preferable. Dignāga has just defended himself by arguing that he retains the word
pratyakṣa (etymologizing it as akṣam akṣam prati vartate) even though Candrakīrti
has pointed out that his etymology ought to be corrected to artham artham prati
vartate and that the word he should be using to accommodate the corrected etymol-
ogy should be pratyartha-because the world uses the word pratyakṣa, not
pratyartha. Candrakīrti retorts that since Dignāga intentionally ignores the fact that
people understand the word pratyakṣa to refer to the object when he etymologizes it,
he shouldn't have any qualms about ignoring the word pratyakṣa itself, and thus
should definitely replace it with pratyartha. This is the unwanted conclusion Candra-
kīrti has been forcing on Dignāga all along and it is certainly expected in the final
sentence. The translation yielded by PsP Tib and de La Vallée Poussin's conjectured
Sanskrit, viz., “Therefore, there would not in this way be [that called] pratyakṣa,”
robs the concluding sentence of its continuity and its nice punch, and leaves us with
the weak and redundant conclusion that the opponent would simply give up using the
word pratyakṣa. It fails as a response to the opponent's defence focussed on the
acceptability of his use of pratyakṣa as opposed to pratyartha.
The manuscript used by the PsP Tib translators may have read pratyakṣam where
pratyartham originally stood, thus forcing them, like de La Vallée Poussin, to conjec-
ture a na, or it may have presented the dittography eva(m)va, the latter va of which
looked like na and caused the translators to emend pratyartham to pratyakşam.
Siderits (1981: 154), who has been misled by Vaidya's (= PsP₁'s) faulty text, notices
that the argument as it stands (and as he has interpreted it) is a weak one, and adds to
his explanation of the passage the judgement “Candrakīrti is not at his best in this
debate over the derivation of 'pratyakṣa'." Both Arnold's (2005b: 457) and Seyfort
Ruegg's (2002: 130) translations of the sentence are naturally also based on PSPL.
Mention might additionally be made of Arnold's (2005b: 457) unexpected translation284
TRANSLATION
§116. Additionally, one visual consciousness, which has as [its] sup-
port a [single] moment (kṣana) of one sense faculty, would not be
pratyakṣa, because there is not the distribution (vīpsārtha) [expected
by the word etymologized as akşam akṣam prati vartate]. And when a
single [moment of visual consciousness] is not pratyakṣa, neither
would many [i.e., a continuum of such moments] be [pratyakṣa].535
of the final clause of the previous sentence as "[then] there would also be disregard
for the expression 'well-known'!"; he does, however, in a note (ibid., 457, n. 165)
provide an alternative translation for the compound prasiddhaśabdatiraskāraḥ which
is comparable to mine above. Thakchoe (2010: 107) follows Arnold in taking prasi-
ddha (rab tu grags pa) as the referent of sabda.
tr
535 Candrakīrti argues on the basis of the etymology requiring the involvement of
more than one sense (akṣam akṣam). Cp. the argumentation in CŚȚ (CŚȚTed 64.15-
18): 'o na dbang po'i rnam par shes pa skad cig ma gcig ji ltar mngon sum nyid yin |
de ni dbang po dang dbang po la brten nas 'jug pa ma yin te | thun mong ma yin pa'i
phyir dang | dbang po dang rnam par shes pa'i skad cig dag skyes ma thag tu jig pa
nyid kyi phyir ro || "But how is one moment of a sense consciousness pratyakṣa? It
does not occur in dependence on various senses, because it is specific and because
the single moment of [respectively] sense and consciousness perishes as soon as it
has arisen" (cf. also CŚȚ 177). The discussion in the CŚȚ continues with the oppon-
ent defending the case of one moment of consciousness being pratyakṣa by arguing
that the atoms making up the sense faculty are individually causes for the cons-
ciousness, thereby implying that the distributive meaning contained in akṣam akşam
prati should be understood as related to the various atoms of the (single) sense
faculty. After rejecting this solution, Candrakīrti considers the opponent's objection
that the requirements of the etymology are fulfilled because he maintains that the
collection (tshogs) of the various consciousnesses occurs in relation to their corres-
ponding sense faculties. He replies: 'di yang yod pa ma yin no || gang las she na | mig
gi rnam par shes pa'i skad cig ma gcig la de ltar bye brag tu bshad pa mi srid pa'i
phyir la tshogs pa rdzas su med pa la yang dbang po la brten pa nyid med pa'i phyir
ro (CŚTTed 66.5-9; see CŚȚ„ 178).
tr
Candrakīrti's etymology pratigatam akṣam asmin is not distributive and is thus not
threatened by a focus on only one moment of consciousness.
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 130) understands Candrakīrti to be arguing that one moment of
visual consciousness would not be visible: "And a single eye-cognition having a sin-
gle moment of the sense-faculty for its sense-base would not [then] possess the
condition of being directly perceptible.” Arnold (2005b: 458) translates vīpsārthā-
bhāvāt as "since there would be no point in repetition" but Candrakīrti intends it as
"because there is not the meaning of distribution." Arnold (cf. ibid., 458, n. 167 and
168), considering vīpsā in the present context to imply continuity or successiveness,
appears to take Candrakīrti to be arguing that Dignāga's etymology is impossible
since there cannot be the successiveness of the moments of a specific sense (calledPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
285
§117. And because [you] maintain that only cognition devoid of
conceptuality (kalpanāpoḍha) is pratyakṣa-yet since with that
[definition] there is no [reflection of] worldly usage and since world-
ly usage regarding means of valid cognition and object cognized is
supposed to be explained-[your] conception (kalpanā) of the means
of valid cognition pratyaksa turns out to be absolutely useless
(vyartha).
§118. And neither is it the case that according to authoritative testi-
mony (āgama) only consciousness free of conceptuality is pratyakṣa,
because in the case of the āgama [that you adduce as support for this
idea, namely,] "One endowed with visual consciousness cognizes [the
object] blue but not '[this is] blue,"536 the [discussion] point
for, following Arnold, by the etymology's akṣam akṣam) when only one moment of
consciousness is taken into consideration. It is true that a lack of succession entails
when the focus is restricted to one moment of a sense, but Candrakīrti's point is that
distribution over more than one sense (as indicated by akṣam akṣam)—be it various
senses or later moments of the same sense-is not possible when the topic is one
moment of a sense consciousness.
536 The same āgama statement is cited by Dignāga in PSV ad PS I.4ab as support for
pratyakṣa being free of conceptuality (see Steinkellner 2005: 2; Hattori 1968: 26).
Dignāga indicates that the statement comes from an Abhidharma treatise. Jinendra-
buddhi (cf. Steinkellner et al. 2005: 43) comments on Dignāga's citation as follows:
na kevalam pratyakṣeṇaiva kalpanāpoḍhatvam siddham, api tv āgamenāpīti darśa-
yann āha
abhidharme 'pītyādi. samanganam samangaḥ sangatir ity arthaḥ.
cakṣurvijñānena samangaḥ so syāstīti cakṣurvijñānasamangī, cakṣurvijñānena
sangata iti yāvat. nīlam vijānātīti nīlam arthasvarūpeṇa jānāti, no tu nīlam iti na tan
nāmato nīlam etad iti jānāti. See Hattori 1968: 88, n. 1.36. It is to be noted that for
Candrakīrti, the category agama includes canonical Abhidharma works; see too his
commentary on MMK I.8 where a quotation from the Prakaraṇa is referred to as
āgama.
De La Vallée Poussin (AKBh, I.28, n. 1) notes that the equivalent for cakṣurvijñāna-
samangī nīlam jānāti no tu nīlam iti is found in the Vijñānakāya of the Sarvāstivāda
school (see also Frauwaller 1964: 90; Frauwallner 1995: 29 and Muni Jambuvijayaji
1966: 61). Lambert Schmithausen informs me that Hsüan tsang's translation of the
Vijñānakāya (cf. T 26:559b27f.) lacks an equivalent for samangī. AKBh on AK
III.30cd presents the expanded reading cakṣurvijñānena nīlam vijānāti no tu
<nīlam>¹ manovijñānena nīlam vijānāti nīlam iti ca vijānātīti | ¹re: <nīlam>: the right
margin of the manuscript is missing but there is space for (only) two akṣaras
(AKBhed 144.3-4; see Pāsādika 1989: 63). The same citation as found in the PSV and
PSP is cited by Yaśomitra in the AKVy (AKVy 64.22-23: cakṣurvijñānasamamgi286
TRANSLATION
'formulation of a definition for pratyaksa' is not topical,537 and
because [this particular āgama merely] teaches that the five sense
nīlam vijānāti nohati [read with AKVy mss no tu] nīlam iti vacanāt). One expects a
second iti in Candrakīrti's text to mark the end of the citation (thus no tu nīlam ity iti
cāgamasya) but none of the manuscripts attest one; PsP Tib, however, assumes one:
mig gi rnam par shes pa dang ldan pas sngon po shes kyi sngon po'o snyam du ni ma
yin no zhes bya ba’i lung. Hsüan tsang’s Vijñānakāya translation has been rendered
in a way that suggests that nīlam was construed with an iti (Vijñānakāya Chinese:
"... but it does not cognize 'This is blue”). Hsüan tsang translates AKBhed 144.2-4
the same way, i.e., the translation of no tu nīlam implies the construal of nīlam with a
following iti (AKBh Chinese: "cognizes blue, [but] does not cognize ‘[It] is blue");
cp. the AKBh sentence focussing on manovijñāna, where nīlam iti expresses the
cognitive determination of the object (manovijñānena nīlam vijānāti nīlam iti ca
vijānātīti). The AKBh's reading cakṣurvijñānena nīlam vijānāti no tu <nīlam> is
strange because the sentence as it stands contradicts itself. Its second nīlam might be
intended predicatively, but even so one expects, for the sake of clarity, nīlataḥ or nī-
latayā/nīlatvena; note the clear opposition nīlam / nīlam iti when manovijñāna is ex-
plained. On the other hand, the fact that the AKVy and the PsP manuscripts present
only one iti after no tu nīlam may indicate that this single iti was understood as
serving a double function, that is, it acts as 1) part of the citation, and 2) the citation
marker. The question nevertheless remains open as to whether an iti has dropped out
in the above cases. ca of iti cāgamasya is presumably not an error (cp. PsP₁ 74, n. 6
where de La Vallée Poussin, noting the missing iti, reconstructs PSP Tib's Sanskrit as
nīlam iti [sñams du] ity āgamasyāpi) but—standing in second place in the sentence
(the citation is a unit) is rather intended as a sentence-connector; the second ca
serves to coordinate the two reasons.
The AKVy citation occurs in the context of answering the AKBh question regarding
how the five consciousnesses can be without conceptuality (avikalpika) if they are
savitarka and savicāra (= introductory sentence to AK I.33ab. See AKBhed 22.20-22
where it is stated that according to the Vaibhāṣikas, only one of the three types of
vikalpa applies to the five consciousnesses and therefore, just as a horse with one
foot is said to be "without feet," so are the consciousnesses said to be avikalpika.
Yaśomitra supplies the Sautrāntika view). In the PSV Dignāga continues his citation:
arthe rthasamjñī, na tv dharmasamjñī iti (not cited by Candrakīrti; see Steinkellner
2005: 2); as Hattori (1968: 88, n. 1.37) notes, "To have dharma-samjñā in respect to
an object means to apprehend the object by its name." Jinendrabuddhi explicates (cf.
Steinkellner et al. 2005: 43): arthe 'rthasañjñīty arthe svarūpasañjñī. na tv arthe
dharmasanjñīti nārthe nāmasañjñīty arthaḥ.
537 The PSP Tib translators have understood pratyakṣalakṣaṇābhidhānārthasya of
pratyakṣalakṣaṇābhidhānārthasyāprastutatvāt as a bahuvrīhi: mngon sum gyi mtshan
nyid brjod pa'i don can gyi skabs ma yin pa nyid kyi phyir (“because it is not a case of
[an āgama] which has the purpose of stating a definition of pratyakṣa") but it may be
better understood as a subjective genitive. Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 131), in reliance on
the Tibetan bahuvrīhi interpretation, translates: "For (i) there is no relevance [here]287
consciousnesses [in contradistinction to mental consciousness] are
insentient (jada) [i.e., are not capable of making the determination
"blue"].538 Thus, this [assigning the status of pratyakṣa to non-
conceptual consciousness] is not tenable.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§119. Therefore, everything in ordinary life—be it [something] char-
acterized (lakṣya) or a characteristic (lakṣaṇa), a particular charac-
teristic or a general characteristic (svasāmānyalakṣaṇa)—through
being directly (sākṣāt) apprehended is not beyond the ken of the
senses (aparokṣa) [and] is thus established as [that which is] pratya-
kṣa, along with the cognition which has that [directly perceived thing]
as its object.53⁹ Yet with respect to the cognition of [persons] without
of the Āgama which has the sense expressing the defining characteristic of direct
perception." As Arnold (2005b: 459, n. 175) has already pointed out, Candrakīrti's
rebuttal as Seyfort Ruegg understands it would fail to effectively counter Dignāga’s
claim, for it has Candrakīrti accepting that the āgama cited does indeed deal with
direct perception; he states, “Ruegg tries to salvage Candrakīrti's point by taking the
sentence to mean that this passage, though defining 'perception,' is not relevant
here." My (and Arnold's) interpretation of this reason reflects Candrakīrti's intent: he
is rejecting that the āgama used as support for Dignāga's claim that pratyakṣa is free
of conceptuality has anything at all to do with the topic of pratyakṣa and he is
justified in doing so, because both the Vijñānakāya and the AKBh are merely differ-
entiating sense consciousness from mental consciousness. Arnold (ibid.) notes that
"Yasomitra's citation of the passage recommends Candrakīrti's point; for Yaso-
mitra adduces the quotation in commenting on the part of Vasubandhu's text that
treats the cognitive outputs of the five non-mental senses and the point of the
passage is (as Candrakīrti goes on to say) thus to urge simply that the outputs of the
five sense faculties are not meaningful until they have become the objects, as well, of
the manovijñāna. This quotation, as deployed by these Ābhidharmikas, therefore
indeed does not state a definition of perception, but instead makes a characteristically
Abhidharmika point about the relationship between the five bodily ‘vijñānas' and the
manovijñāna."
—
*LT's author explains that the reason aprastutatvāt has been used because the pratya-
kṣa free of conceptuality is not a part of everyday practice inasmuch as it is spoken of
with respect to the ultimate state: aprastutatvād iti paramārthāpekṣayoktatvena vya-
vahārānangatvāt (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 125, 148 [fol. 3a2]). The point may also be
that it is therefore not useful in the framework of everyday practice.
538 *LT: jaḍatveti | yathābhūtānavabodhāt (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 125, 148 [fol. 3a3]).
539 All previous translators of this section only had recourse to PsP₁'s faulty reading
yadi lakṣyam yadi vā svalakṣaṇam sāmānyalakṣaṇam vā for yadi lakṣyam yadi vā
lakṣaṇam svasāmānyalakṣaṇam vā. PsP Tib has been influenced by the same faulty288
the timira [disorder], a double moon and so forth are not pratyakṣa;
however, with respect to [persons] who have timira, etc., [the double
moon and so forth are] indeed pratyakṣa.
540
TRANSLATION
reading, passed on to it by a manuscript in ms Q's transmission line: de'i phyir gal te
mtshan gzhi 'am rang gi mtshan nyid dam spyi'i mtshan nyid kyang rung ste |. Seyfort
Ruegg's (2002: 131) translation is problematic: “Therefore, for ordinary folk in the
world (loka), if [as claimed by you, there indeed exists] a lakṣya, or if [there indeed
exists both] a svalakṣaṇa and a sāmānyalakṣaṇa, all will in fact be not unamenable to
perception (aparokṣa = lkog tu ma gyur pa), for there will [then] be immediate appre-
hension (sākṣād upalabhyamānatvāt). And [by you] the pratyakṣa is accordingly set
out systematically (vyavasthāpyate) along with the (vi)jñāna having it for its object."
yadi in the construction yadi yadi vā is not a conditional in the sense of "if"
(Seyfort Ruegg assumes an implicit tadā before sarvam) but rather means "whether."
The assignment of the part of the sentence commencing with ataḥ to Dignāga is
unexpected and mistaken, for Candrakīrti is setting forth his own view here, and
secondarily designating consciousness as pratyakṣa. Stcherbatsky's (1927: 163)
translation was much closer to the intended sense: “Therefore from the empirical,
(not from the transcendental), point of view, everything without exception is called
present, (i.e., a perception), when it is directly perceived (by the senses), whether it
be (your strictly) particular essence or the general essence of the thing (possessing
both these essences). A perception is thus determined (as meaning) the object of
perception together with its cognition." Arnold (2005b: 460), who appears to have
been influenced by Siderits' (1981: 155) translation takes the first yadi in a con-
ditional sense and construes it with ataḥ; he translates “Therefore, in the world, if
any (sarvam eva) subject of characterization (lakṣya) — whether it be a svalakṣaṇa or
a sāmānyalakṣaṇa is visible, because of being directly apprehended, then it is
established as perceptible, along with the cognition that has it as its object [which is
derivatively called pratyakṣa]." Although Arnold has in part been misled by PsP₁'s
faulty text, his classification of svalakṣaṇa and sāmānyalakṣaṇa as subcategories of
lakṣya (verging on Dignāga's presentation! [see *LȚ]) would certainly be rejected by
Candrakīrti.
*LT's author also errs in his interpretation of the sentence, identifying, like Siderits
and Arnold, svalakṣaṇam and sāmānyalakṣaṇam as subtypes of lakṣyam. I suspect
that his PSP exemplar had been influenced by the reading yadi lakṣyam yadi vā svala-
kṣaṇam sāmānyalakṣaṇam vā which appears in ms Q: lakṣ[y]am iti | prameyam tac ca
svalakṣaṇam | sāmānyalakṣaṇam vā (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 125, 148 [fol. 3a3]).
540 Candrakīrti sums up his discussion on pratyakṣa by reiterating his own view on
this important pramāṇa: pratyakṣa is properly the thing that is apprehended; the
object itself is the means of knowledge and the establisher of its existence and char-
acteristics. The consciousness that apprehends the pratyakṣa is only secondarily, in
reliance on the actual pramāṇa, i.e., the object, designated pratyakṣa. Further, even
though everything that is directly apprehended can be classified as pratyakṣa, a
certain thing's being determined as such depends on the individual apprehending it.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
289
§120. In contrast, the cognition whose object is beyond the ken of the
senses [and] which has arisen from a sign (linga) that does not de-
viate from the probandum is inference (anumāna).541
Thus even objects like the imaginary flies, hairs and double moon seen by persons
afflicted by the timira visual disorder, though not pratyakṣa for someone not visually
impaired, cannot be denied their place in the pratyakṣa category.
Cp. Candrakīrti's closing comments from his attack on the Epistemologist in the
CST: gang yang 'dis dbang po'i rnam par shes pa 'di mngon sum nyid du sgro btags
nas gzhan tshad ma nyid du rtog par byed (read, following P: byed pa) de yang ches
shin tu ma 'brel pa zhig go || mi slu ba'i shes pa ni 'jig rten na tshad ma nyid du
mthong na rnam par shes pa yang bcom ldan 'das kyis 'dus byas yin pa'i phyir brdzun
pa bslu ba'i chos can dang sgyu ma lta bur gsungs so || gang zhig brdzun pa bslu baʼi
chos can dang sgyu ma lta bu yin pa de ni mi bslu ba ma yin te | rnam pa gzhan du
gnas pa'i dngos po la rnam pa gzhan du snang ba'i phyir ro || de lta bur gyur pa ni
tshad ma nyid du brtag par rigs pa ma yin te | rnam par shes pa thams cad kyang
tshad ma nyid du thal bar 'gyur ba'i phyir ro || (CŚTTed 67.10-17). “And also this
[opponent's] conception that this sense consciousness is another means of valid cog-
nition—[the consciousness] having wrongly had [the status of] pratyakṣa attributed
to it is extremely incoherent." (my translation; Tillemans translates the sentence as:
"He who fabricates the notion that this sense consciousness is pratyakṣa and then
also imagines that it is a means of valid cognition (tshad ma = pramāṇa) is com-
pletely beside the point,” but Candrakīrti is not characterizing the opponent himself
as "beside the point." Continuing on with Tillemans' translation:) “While a non-
belying (mi slu ba = avisamvādin) consciousness is regarded as being a pramāṇa in
the world, the Illustrious One said that consciousness, since it is conditioned ('dus
byas samskṛta), is false and deceptive and is like an illusion (sgyu ma = māyā).
Whatever is false and deceptive and is like an illusion is not non-belying, for it is an
entity which exists in one way and appears in another. Something like that should not
be imagined to be a pramāṇa in that [if it were] it would follow that every conscious-
ness would also have to be a pramāṇa” (CŚȚ„ 179).
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 132) understands the entire PsP paragraph as continuing the
critique of Dignāga (see also the previous note) and thus translates his final sentence
as: "However, [following your doctrine,] in respect [even] to those who are affected
by eye-disease and the like (taimirikādyapekṣayā) there will indeed be direct percep-
tibility."
541 Most modern scholars assert at this point that Candrakīrti accepts the pramāṇas
inference, authoritative testimony and comparison as posited by the Nyāya school;
cf., e.g., Stcherbatsky 1927: 163, n. 6; Siderits 1981: 156; 2011: 172 and n. 12.
Arnold (2005a: 182) asserts, “Having thus argued that his interlocutor's account of
pratyakṣa contradicts the conventional usage, Candrakīrti effectively states by en-
dorsing (with typically Naiyāyika definitions) the list of pramāṇas admitted by Nai-
yāyikas that the epistemology of the Brahmanical Nyāya school better describes
our epistemic practices as they are conventionally understood." Although the Nyāya290
TRANSLATION
school does accept these three pramāṇas, I am not convinced that Candrakīrti intends
to directly endorse the Naiyāyika presentation, or that he is necessarily paraphrasing
the definitions asserted by that school. The definition he provides for inference, i.e.,
parokṣavisayam jñānam sādhyāvyabhicārilingotpannam anumānam, bears no resem-
blance to the older definition atha tatpūrvakam trividham anumānam pūrvavaccheṣa-
vatsāmānyatodrstam ca given at NS I.1.5, and it would be a stretch to consider it to
represent a paraphrase or extremely abbreviated version of the explanation given by
Pakṣilasvāmin in his commentary on NS I.1.5: tatpūrvakam ity anena lingalinginoḥ
sambandhadarśanam lingadarśanam cābhisambadhyate. lingalinginoḥ sambaddha-
yor darśanena lingasmṛtir abhisambadhyate. smṛtyā lingadarśanena cāpratyakṣo
'rtho 'numīyate (NBh 12.4-6; translated in Oberhammer 1991: 48; see also Junankar
1978: 117). A characterization offered by Uddyotakara, namely, (bhavatu vāyam
artho) laingikī pratipattir anumānam (NV 26.21-27.1) is, in its brevity and with its
reference to a subjective act and a sign (although here the subjective act is not
explicitly presented as resulting from the sign), somewhat closer, but this explanation
makes no reference to the fact that the linga, i.e., the hetu, must not deviate from the
sādhya, i.e., must be absent from dissimilar cases, nor does it make reference to a
parokṣa object. As regards the next pramāṇa presented here in the PsP, namely,
agama, the definition set forth by Candrakīrti appears to be structured to present
āgama as conveying information solely about objects / states of affairs out of the
range of the senses. NS I.1.8, on the other hand, states that sabda is of two kinds
(note the difference in terminology; Uddyotakara, however, employs the word āgama
as a synonym for śabda in his commentary on this sūtra): relating to seen things and
to unseen things (NS I.1.8: sa dvividho dṛṣṭādṛṣṭārthatvāt). Pakṣilasvāmin explains
that seen and unseen things refer to things perceived respectively in this world and in
the next; accordingly, he states, there is a division of the statements of worldlings and
rșis. In his comments on NS I.1.7 (āptopadeśaḥ śabdaḥ), Pakṣilasvāmin counts rșis,
āryas and even mlecchas as persons who may have the characteristic of reliability
(āpti), the characteristic required for them to be termed āptas (cf. NBh 14.4-5;
Oberhammer 1991: 119). That he considers the statements of ordinary persons who
have gained their knowledge of the things they describe by ordinary means to be a
valid form of sabda is clear from a later statement: loke ca bhūyān upadeśāśrayo
vyavahāraḥ. laukikasyāpy upadestur upadeṣṭavyārthajñānena parānujighrkṣayā
yathābhūtārthacikhyāpayiṣayā ca prāmāṇyam, tatparigrahāc cāptopadeśaḥ pramā-
ṇam iti (NBh 97.12-14). Translated in Oberhammer 1991 (119f.): "Auch im
normalen Weltgeschehen basiert der Umgang [der Menschen miteinander] meist auf
Mitteilungen [durch Glaubwürdige]. Die Massgeblichkeit eines, der im alltäglichen
Leben etwas mitteilt, ergibt sich [ebenso wie beim nicht profanen Lehrer] dadurch,
dass er das, was er mitteilen will, [selbst] erkannt hat, dadurch, dass er [sein Wissen]
mit dem anderen teilen möchte und dadurch, dass er die Sache so darzulegen
wünscht, wie sie wirklich ist. Die Mitteilung eines [profanen] Glaubwürdigen ist
[daher ebenfalls] Erkenntnismittel, weil [sie] das umfasst.” Uddyotakara, in his refu-
tation of the claim that sabda as described in NS I.1.7 can be classified, depending on
how the sūtra is interpreted, as either pratyakṣa or anumāna and thus should not bePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
291
§121. The statement (vacana) of persons of authority (āpta) who know
directly objects / states of affairs out of the range of the sense facul-
ties (atīndriya) is authoritative testimony (āgama).
considered as another pramāṇa, describes sabda as relating to objects both connected
and not connected with the sense faculties (nāyam sūtrārthaḥ āptopadeśaḥ śabda iti
api tv indriyasambaddhāsambaddheṣv artheṣu yā śabdollekhena pratipattiḥ sā āga-
masyārthaḥ | [NV 57.6-8]). Finally, the definition Candrakīrti gives for the fourth
pramāṇa upamāna (presented in the NS as the third pramāṇa, śabda is given as the
fourth), namely, sādṛśyād ananubhūtārthādhigama upamānaṁ gaur iva gavaya iti
yathā, also cannot accurately be called a paraphrase of prasiddhasādharmyāt sādhya-
sādhanam upamānam (NS I.1.6). Even though it contains the same example that
Pakṣilasvāmin provides, Candrakīrti’s definition markedly differs from Pakṣilasvā-
min's explanation of the NS definition, namely, prajñātena sāmāṇyāt prajñāpanīya-
sya prajñāpanam upamānam iti | yathā gaur evam gavaya iti | (NBh 13.11-12). On
upamāna, see, e.g., Oberhammer 1996: 43-49.
Although conclusive evidence is lacking, I am inclined to think that, similar to the
case of pratyakṣa for which we can assume that Candrakīrti draws on a Buddhist
source for his explanation of it (see n. 516), Candrakīrti has taken over the definitions
of anumāna, āgama and upamāna he cites or paraphrases here from Buddhist ma-
terials. We know from the *Upāyahṛdaya (the extant Chinese version was translated
in 472 CE; an earlier translation is lost) that the four pramāṇas *pratyakṣa,
*anumāna, *āgama/śabda/āptaśruti and *upamāna were indeed posited within the
Buddhist fold (cf. Kajiyama 1991: 109; Nagasaki 1991: 221); the older
*Upayahṛdaya definitions, however, differ from those set forth by Candrakīrti; see
Tucci 1981: 13f. (Sanskrit reconstruction). The Kuṣāṇa-period Spitzer manuscript
investigated by Eli Franco also strongly suggests the admission of four pramāṇas on
the part of some Buddhists. Franco (2010: 121) writes, “As far as I know, this manu-
script is the only Sanskrit source that testifies to the fact that certain Buddhists, pro-
bably affiliated to the Sarvāstivāda school, accepted a theory of four pramāṇas. It
confirms thereby the testimony of *Upāyahṛdaya/*Prayogasāra which is available
only in Chinese translation." The Spitzer manuscript's discussion about pratyakṣa is
lost, but fragments of the discussion on inference (anumāna) have been preserved
(Franco assumes that the pratyakṣa discussion preceded it). A discussion on compari-
son or analogy (aupamya) follows the consideration of inference. Franco presumes
that a discussion on verbal testimony (possibly aitihya) closed the presentation of the
pramāṇas. He (ibid., 126) notes: "The sequence of the discussion is significant
because it shows that the exposition followed the same tradition as that of the Nyāya-
sūtra and the *Upāyahṛdaya as opposed to the one followed in the Carakasaṁhitā,
where comparison and verbal testimony are discussed in reverse order. However, in
terminology the discussion follows the same tradition as that of the Carakasamhitā,
and uses the terms aupamya and, possibly, aitihya rather than upamāna and śabda.”
See Eltschinger 2010: 48, n. 79 for comments on the varying number of pramāṇas in
the Buddhist tradition. Future research may shed more light on the matter as it relates
to Candrakīrti and his sources.292
§122. The apprehension of an object not [previously] experienced
[that comes about] due to similarity (sādṛśya) [with another object] is
comparison (upamāna), as [when one has been told] “a gavaya is like
a gaur.
99542
TRANSLATION
§123. Thus the world's apprehension of objects is in this way
established as being from the four-fold means of valid cognition. And
those [means of valid cognition and their objects] are established in
reliance on each other.543 Therefore, just let worldly [things] be, the
way [they are] observed.
542 A gayal (Skt. gavaya; Bos gaurus frontalis) is often referred to as a subspecies of
the gaur (Bos gaurus: a type of wild ox, also referred to as Indian bison), and is
thought to be the result of the interbreeding of gaur and domestic cattle. Gayals are
smaller than the gaur and are without the gaur's massive shoulder hump. Both have
horns and dewlaps (cf. International Wildlife Encylopedia, Third Edition, New York:
Marshall Cavendish Corporation, 2002, pp. 936ff.). As Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 133, n.
258) notes, the example comparing a gayal to a gaur is found already in Patañjali's
Mahābhāṣya II.i.55. Franco (2001: 10) reports that the example also appears in the
discussion of the pramāṇa aupamya (= upamāna) in the Buddhist Kuṣāṇa-period
Spitzer manuscript.
543 Two sentences have been written in Ms Q's lower margin (presumably by the
same scribe as that of the main text) and are marked to be inserted after tāni ca para-
sparāpekṣayā sidhyanti, viz., satsu pramāṇeṣu prameyārthāḥ satsu prameyeșu
pramāṇāni | no tu khalu svāṁgavikī (read: svābhāvikī) pramāṇaprameyayoḥ siddhir iti
"When the means of valid cognition exist, the objects cognized (prameyārtha)
[exist]; when the objects cognized exist, the means of valid cognition [exist]. But
there is absolutely not establishment by way of own-being (svābhāvika) of the means
of valid cognition and what is cognized.” The four paper manuscripts (B, D, J, L)
attest (with minor variants) both of the sentences and also include the word artheṣu
after prameyeșu. PsP Tib attests the Tibetan translation of the two sentences: tshad
ma dag yod na gzhal bya'i don dag tu 'gyur la | gzhal bya'i don dag yod na tshad ma
dag tu 'gyur gyi | tshad ma dang gzhal bya gnyis ngo bo nyid kyis grub pa ni yod pa
ma yin no ||. De La Vallée Poussin includes, along with ms L's artheṣu, the two
sentences in PSP₁. Ms P, however, does not attest either of the sentences. The PSP
exemplar relied upon by *LT's author also seems not to have attested the sentences,
because *LȚ's author misunderstands tāni (“those”) to refer only to the means of
valid cognition (tānīti pramāṇāni; cf. Yonezawa 2004: 125, 148 [fol. 3a3]). Had the
sentences been attested by his PsP exemplar he would surely have understood that
the mutual dependence intended is between the pramāṇas and the prameyas, and not
nonsensically beween the individual pramāṇas (even if one assumes that Candrakīrti
intends the pramāṇa pratyakṣa as the object, and not the consciousness, a coherent
presentation of the mutual dependency of the pramāṇas is still impossible).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
293
I doubt that the two sentences were originally part of Q's text; that is, I think it quite
unlikely that they were in the main text of Q's exemplar and accidentally overlooked
by Q's scribe during the process of copying, but then added in the margin when the
scribe noticed his mistake. One might attempt to explain the fact that exactly the
same two sentences are missing from the main text of both ms P and ms Q by conjec-
turing that ms P's and ms Q's scribes dropped precisely the same textual material
owing to an eyeskip from nti of sidhyanti to ti of iti, but this hypothesis is somewhat
weakened by the fact that nt and t do not resemble each other. The sentences become
more suspicious when their content and the argumentative flow of the PSP are taken
into consideration. The sentence satsu pramāṇeṣu prameyārthāḥ satsu prameyeṣu
pramāṇāni indeed spells out what is meant by tāni ca parasparāpekṣayā sidhyanti,
but this information is certainly not necessary for understanding the sentence tāni ca
parasparāpekṣayā sidhyanti, especially because both pramāṇas and objects were just
mentioned in the previous sentence. Candrakīrti's immediate reading audience would
have been familiar with the Madhyamaka presentation of the surface-level mutual
establishment of things like lakṣya and lakṣaṇa (just discussed in the PsP), kāraṇa
and kārya, etc., and would also have been acquainted with the VV's pramāṇa and
prameya discussion inclusive of even though the aim there is to refute ultimate
establishment-its references to the mutual reliance of the pramāṇas and prameyas
(cf. VV 46-56), and would thus not have required further clarification. The second
sentence no tu khalu svābhāvikī pramāṇaprameyayoḥ siddhir iti, in calling attention
to the ultimate nature of the pramāṇas and prameyas, further seems quite unneces-
sary, and almost intrusive in the present worldly-focussed context; note that the con-
necting and final sentence tasmāl laukikam evāstu yathādṛṣṭam follows much more
smoothly after tāni ca parasparāpekṣayā sidhyanti than it does after no tu khalu
svābhāvikī pramāṇaprameyayoḥ siddhir. Thus, given the above and our knowledge
about ms Q's contamination, not least the fact that it has been possible to demon-
strate that a number of the readings written in its margins have been appropriated
from the contaminated manuscript ms 0, I am convinced that the sentences satsu pra-
māṇeṣu prameyārthāḥ satsu prameyeṣu pramāṇāni | no tu khalu svāngavikī (read:
svābhāvikī) pramāṇaprameyayoḥ siddhir iti are foreign to the PsP. A teacher or edu-
cated scribe or reader must have added them, presumably in the margins, as clarifi-
catory information, perhaps because a student or the reader himself stumbled just as
*LȚ’s_author_did, erroneously thinking that tāni of tāni ca parasparāpekṣayā si-
dhyanti referred only to the pramāṇas. The fact that PsP Tib attests a translation for
the sentences shows that the foreign material had made its way into ms y's line some-
time before the late eleventh century. Although the paper manuscripts received the
two sentences via ms 8, the sentences were probably not passed on to ms è from ms
8 because had this happened they would have been incorporated into the main text of
Q's exemplar (ms ŉ or a descendant of n), and would thus have been directly copied
by Q's scribe into Q's main text, and not set in the margin. It thus seems reasonable
to assume that Q's scribe added the marginal material when he checked Q against ms
0.294
TRANSLATION
Enough of this digression. We shall focus our explanation on the
primary subject matter.
544
It may be worth mentioning that even though Candrakīrti emphasized in the pre-
ceding discussion with Dignāga that the pramāṇa pratyakṣa is the object, and that the
consciousness apprehending the pratyakṣa-object is only secondarily designated pra-
tyakṣa, in the present paragraph, in—and for the sake of describing the mutual
reliance of the pramāṇas and their prameyas, he appears to intend the pramāṇa
pratyakṣa in its secondary meaning of consciousness.
544 Following the sentence closing the discussion with Dignāga (alam prasangena
prastutam eva vyākhyāsyāmaḥ), all of the manuscripts present the sentence laukika
eva darśane sthitvā buddhānām bhagavatām dharmadeśanā (“The Buddhas, the
Exalted Ones, teach the norm(s) [of conduct] (dharma) by situating themselves in
(i.e., starting from) the view of ordinary life/people"). The sentence has been in-
cluded in PSP₁. Ms P continues with an unidentified BHS verse composed in dodhaka
metre (for P's unemended reading, see PsP): et' upamābhi nidarśanã vakṣye kin tu
na teṣã samo iha kaścit | paṇḍitavijñajanā... (“This has been taught by way of
similes: I say, [or: I will explain this which has been taught by way of similes:] but
there is not someone in this world equal to them ...”); unfortunately, the leaf breaks
off after panditavijñajanā (P’s text for the final third of the leaf is thus unavailable).
Ms P's text resumes at the beginning of the next line of writing with a pāthya śloka
that can be identified as verse 37 of Matṛceta's Prasādapratibhodbhava (= Śāta-
pañcāśatka = Adhyarddhaśataka; see Shackleton Bailey 1951: 61; see also Hartmann
1987: 23ff.): ajñānatimiraghnasya jñānālokasya te mune | na ravir viṣaye bhūmim
khadyotīm api vindatītyādi || (all but the first two akṣaras, i.e., ajñā, are attested in ms
P; the vowel-marker u in mune is missing. Shackleton Bailey emends khadyotīm to
khadyotīm). Shackleton Bailey (ibid., 159) translates, "Before the light of your know-
ledge, O Sage, which destroys the darkness of ignorance, the sun does not even attain
the level of a firefly." That the PSP exemplar used by *LȚ's author contained at least
the first verse can be ascertained by *LT's citation and gloss of some of its words.
*LȚ: etat[*] upamayābhi darśitam teṣām buddhānām samo na kaścid asti yo jānāti |
(cf. Yonezawa 2004: 125, 148 [fol. 3a3]; Yonezawa reads samo as satya). The word
he glosses next is tāni, which begins the paragraph asserting the mutual dependence
of the pramāṇas and their prameyas; all the PsP manuscripts used for my edition
place the sentence laukika eva darśane sthitvā buddhānām bhagavatām dharma-
deśanā after the closing statement announcing the return to the main subject matter,
i.e., the explanation of MMK I. But this placement of the laukika eva darśane sthitvā
buddhānām bhagavatām dharmadeśanā sentence after the announcement of the
resumption of the main subject matter makes little sense, given that it provides sup-
port for the idea that things on the samvṛti level should be accepted as ordinary
people maintain them to be, which was the topic in the pramāṇa discussion. This
problem with the location of the sentence, together with the fact that the PsP
exemplar used by *LȚ's author seems to have had the sentence laukika eva darśane
sthitvā buddhānām bhagavatāṁ dharmadeśanā and at least one of the verses found in
ms P before the sentences asserting the mutual dependence of the pramāṇas andPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
295
§124. Here, [some] belonging to [our] own group (= fellow Bud-
dhists) (svayuthya) 545 say: This which has been stated, [namely,]
"Things do not arise from self,"546 is correct, because arising from
self is pointless. And what is also stated, [namely,] “[Things do] not
[arise] from both [self and other]" is correct, because of the ruin
(hāni) of one part (i.e., arising from self has been rejected). On the
other hand, the thesis [that things arise] without a cause (ahetupakṣa)
is completely base; thus its refutation as well is appropriate.547 But as
a matter of fact548 this statement, [namely,] "Nor [do things arise]
prameyas also an inappropriate placement-leads one to think that the laukika eva
darśane sthitvā buddhānāṁ bhagavatām dharmadeśanā sentence, and the verses in
ms P and *LȚ's PsP exemplar, quite possibly represent marginalia that were brought
into the main PSP text by different scribes, one deeming that the sentence belonged
after the pramāṇa-discussion section, another determining that it should be placed
before the sentences on mutual dependency, one deciding to include the verses, the
other to leave them in the margin. The complete absence of the laukika eva darśane
sthitvā buddhānām bhagavatām dharmadeśanā sentence and of the verses in PsP Tib
indicates that they were not attested in either of the manuscripts used by Pa tshab and
his Indian collaborators, and thus renders them even more suspicious. I have there-
fore not included them in my edition.
545 Bhāviveka likewise identifies the speakers of MMK I.2 and its PP introduction as
*svayuthyāḥ (rang gi sde pa dag). Avalokitavrata identifies these fellow Buddhists as
"all the Śrāvakas, Sautrāntikas, Vaibhāṣikas and so forth” (nyan thos mdo sde pa
dang bye brag tu smras ba la sogs pa thams cad [PPȚ D 156b1-2; P 180a5-6]).
546 The reference here, as with the following na dvābhyām, ahetu(pakṣas tu ekānta-
nikṛṣṭaḥ) and nāpi parataḥ is, of course, to the negated alternatives of MMK I.1.
547 Candrakīrti has formulated his MMK I.2 introduction along the lines of Buddha-
pālita's introduction to the same kārikā: dngos po rnams bdag las skye ba med de | 'di
ltar myu gu de nyid myu gu de nyid las ji ltar skye zhes bshad pa gang yin pa dang
bdag las skye ba med na bdag dang gzhan gnyis las skye ba de yang mi rigs te |
phyogs gcig nyams pa’i phyir ro zhes bya ba dang | 'di ltar rgyu med pa las skye'o
zhes bya ba'i phyogs de ni tha chad yin pas de dag ni re zhig khas mi len to (BPed
11.3-7).
548 It is sometimes difficult to find a single English word that is able to capture the
meaning of certain Sanskrit particles. I understand khalu in the present context to
mean something like “now pay attention / now we come to the actual problem” and
thus translate it as above.296
TRANSLATION
from other," is incorrect, because the Exalted One has taught that
precisely others produce things.
549
[MMK I.2]
550
There are four conditions (pratyaya): the cause [condition]
(hetu), the object [condition] (arambana), the immediately
preceding [condition] (anantara)
And similarly, the dominant [condition] (adhipateya).551 There is
not a fifth condition.552
549
Cp. with Candrakīrti's PsP introduction to MMK I.2 the argument for arising from
other in the MABh where the opponent, citing from scripture, states: 'di ltar gzhan
du 'gyur ba'i (MABhun: gyur pa’i) rkyen bzhi po rgyu dang dmigs pa dang de ma
thag pa dang de bzhin du bdag po ste | rkyen rnams dngos po rnams kyi skyed par
byed pa'o || (MABhun: without ||) zhes bya ba'i gsung rab la bltos (MABHUN: Itos) nas
mi ’dod pa bzhin du yang gzhan las skye bar khas blang bar bya'o || (MABhed 87.19-
88.3).
550 The manuscripts consistently read ārambaṇa, not ālambana. Cf. BHSD s.v.
ārambaṇa. I therefore retain the manuscripts' readings (see also de Jong 1978: 35
[referring to PSP₁ 76.5]) but sometimes use the designation ālambana in my notes,
especially when citing from other text editions which attest this spelling.
551 De La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 87, n. 2, see also 76, n. 7) spells ādhipateya as adhi-
pateya, noting that Bendall states that it is “a Palicism not hitherto noted in Sanskrit";
the spelling adhipateya has been adopted by various other scholars (cf., e.g., Oetke
2001a: 54, n. 30; 55). See, however, BHSD s.v. ādhipateya.
552 Candrakīrti cites MMK I.2: catvāraḥ pratyayā hetur ārambaṇam anantaram
tathaivādhipateyam ca pratyayo nāsti pañcamaḥ || (intentionally presented in Ye
2011a as MMK I.3; see infra. n. 560). The author of the Akutobhayā attributes this
assertion of four conditions to Ābhidharmikas; his introduction to the kārikā reads:
'dir chos mngon pa shes pa dag gis smras pa (*atrābhidharmajñā āhuḥ) (ABhed
253.20). Buddhapālita states in his commentary that with the assertion that there is
not a fifth condition, “a certain Master" (slob dpon kha cig) ascertains that all con-
ditions spoken of that are other than these four are included in these four (Inga pa
yod pa ma yin zhes bya bas ni slob dpon kha cig gis rkyen bzhi po 'di las gzhan gang
dag tha snyad du brjod pa de dag thams cad kyang rkyen bzhi po 'di dag tu 'du so
zhes nges par 'dzin par byed do || [BPed 11.14-16]). In the next sentence,
Buddhapalita states that for the sake of teaching this, he (= the certain Master) taught
that those four conditions are the conditions that produce things (de rab tu bstan pa’i
phyir rgyu la sogs pa rkyen bzhi po de dag dngos po rnams skyed pa'i rkyen du bstan
te | [BPed 11.16-18]). Bhāviveka's fellow Buddhists state that the “Teacher," i.e., the
Buddha, proclaimed in the sūtras and Abhidharma treatises that there are [only] these
four conditions in the Buddhist and other systems and in the heavenly domain and onPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
297
earth (ston pas mdo sde dang chos mngon pa'i bstan bcos las | rang dang gzhan gyi
gzhung lugs dang | lha yul dang | sa’i steng dag tu bka' stsal to || [PP D 53b2; P 64b2-
3]). Candrakīrti's fellow Buddhists likewise claim that the Buddha himself asserted
the four conditions, and by implication that things are produced from other.
A sutra on the four conditions is cited in AKBh ad AK II.61c: AK II.61c: catvāraḥ
pratyayā uktāḥ; AKBhed 98.5-6: kvoktāḥ | sūtre | catasraḥ pratyayataḥ | hetupratyaya-
tā samanantarapratyayatā ālambanapratyayatā adhipatipratyayatā ceti. Peter
Skilling (1998: 141ff.) has investigated the sūtra and concluded that it belongs to the
section on fours in the (Mūla-)Sarvāstivādin Ekottarikāgama. On the basis of Śama-
thadeva's AK commentary, he reconstructs the sūtra's title as *Pratyayasūtra. The set
of four pratyayas proclaimed in the *Pratyayasūtra, namely, hetupratyaya, ālambana-
pratyaya, samanantarapratyaya and adhipatipratyaya, appears in the early Abhi-
dharma literature of the (Mula-)Sarvāstivāda school, being encountered already in
Devasarman's Vijñānakāya where they are discussed in relation to cognition (cf.
Frauwallner 1995: 27f.; Willemen et al. 1998: 203). Skilling (1998: 143) asserts,
"The theory of four conditions seems to have been the kernel from which more
elaborate theories of causal relations grew. It is presented in the canonical (Mūla-)
Sarvāstivādin Abhidharma, occurring first in the Vijñānakāya (where it is applied to
the six types of consciousness: cakṣurvijñāna, etc.), followed by the Prakaraṇapāda
and the Jñānaprasthāna. The latter text is generally held to be the latest of the seven
Sarvāstivādin Abhidharma treatises, and dated to the 1st century BCE. If this dating
is correct, the theory of four conditions must have evolved by the end of the 2nd
century BCE." The four pratyayas also occur in later (Mūla-)Sarvāstivādin works
such as the Abhidharmahṛdaya; further references in Skilling 1998: 144.
The Sarvāstivādins additionally set forth a separate classification of hetu into six (cf.
AK II.49: kāraṇam sahabhūś caiva sabhāgaḥ samprayuktakaḥ sarvatrago vipā-
kākhyaḥ ṣaḍvidho hetur isyate ||), a classification that is first seen in the Jñāna-
prasthāna. Skilling (1998: 144) states: "Thus the four conditions were a fundamental
category of the (Mūla-)Sarvāstivāda-Vaibhāṣikas. An alternate theory of causation
within the same tradition propounded a list of six causes (hetu). That the six causes
were a later development is shown by the fact that, unlike the four conditions, they
are not mentioned in any sūtra a point which was not ignored, and which left their
authenticity open to challenge. According to the Vaibhāṣikas themselves, the six
causes first appeared in the Jñānaprasthāna of Kātyāyanīpūtra. Later scholastics
attempted to reconcile and coordinate the two originally independent lists." The first
of the six hetus, namely, kāraṇahetu, the "cause [for being]" hetu, refers to hetu in its
broadest possible application: all dharmas which do not obstruct the arising of a
specific dharma are its kāraṇahetu (AK II.50a: svato 'nye kāraṇam hetuḥ); allowance
is made, however, in the AKBh for “predominant" kāraṇahetus, for example, the
visual sense faculty and the visible are the main kāraṇahetus for the visual conscious-
ness, food the main one for the body, and seeds, etc., for spouts, etc. (AKBhed 83.8-9:
yas tu pradhānaḥ kāraṇahetuḥ sa utpādane 'pi samartho yathā cakṣūrūpe
cakṣurvijñānasyāhāraḥ śarīrasya bījādayo ʼnkurādīnām; AKVy 190.27-28: yo hi
pradhāno janakaḥ sa kāraṇahetuḥ. sa sutarām avighnabhāvenāvatiṣṭhate na kevalam298
TRANSLATION
itaraḥ). sahabhūhetu, “simultaneous cause,” refers to causes that serve as each
others' causes, e.g., the simultaneously arising elements in a molecule, or
consciousness and the mental factors which accompany it (AK II.50b-d: sahabhūr ye
mithaḥphalāḥ | bhūtavac cittacittānuvartilakṣaṇalakṣyavat). sabhāgahetu, “homoge-
neous cause,” is the cause that accounts for the production of a like result, e.g., from
a previous moment of corn a subsequent moment of corn, not rice, arises (AK
II.52ab: sabhāgahetuḥ sadṛśaḥ svanikāyabhūvo 'grajāḥ); samprayuktahetu, "con-
comitant cause," refers to consciousness and mental factors that arise together
sharing the same support; they are considered as similar in five ways (AK II.53cd:
samprayuktakahetus tu cittacaittāḥ samāśrayāḥ). sarvatragahetu, “universal cause,"
refers to the universal anuśayas and their influence; they are the causes of defiled
dharmas (AK II.54ab: sarvatragākhyaḥ kliṣṭānām svabhūmau pūrvasarvagāḥ; AK
V.12 sets forth the universal anuśayas: sarvatragă duḥkhahetudṛggheyā dṛṣṭayas
tathā | vimatiḥ saha tābhiś ca yāvidyāveṇikī ca yā). Finally, vipākahetu, “maturation
cause," is the cause of the different ripenings experienced (AK II.54cd: vipākahetur
aśubhāḥ kuśalāś caiva sāsravāḥ); cf., e.g., Hirakawa 1990: 179-184; La Vallée
Poussin 1913a: 54-56; Lamotte 1980: 2174-2179; Conze 1967: 154-156. The
pratyaya scheme encompasses that of the hetus: the latter five causes are included in
hetupratyaya, and the first, kāraṇahetu, is equivalent to adhipatipratyaya; sama-
nantarapratyaya and ālambanapratyaya find no equivalent in the hetu model (AK
II.61d: hetvākhyaḥ pañca hetavaḥ; AKBhed 98.8: kāraṇahetuvarjyāḥ pañca hetavo
hetupratyayaḥ; for an alternative opinion, see AKBh II.299, n. 1).
As Skilling (1998: 147) notes: "Schools that accepted the *Pratyayasūtra could not
expand the system of relations by adding further conditions to the original four, as
did the Theravādins who did not accept the discourse; rather, they had to subdivide
the four basic conditions, and correlate them with sets of causes (hetu)." The four
pratyayas are included in the list of ten pratyayas given in the Śāriputrābhidharma-
śāstra, thought by some scholars to belong to the Dharmaguptaka school (cf. Frau-
wallner 1995: 97 and n. 1 and 2, 105-107; Hirakawa 1990: 179, 182f.; Skilling [1998:
145] states the śāstra's school affiliation remains unknown), and in the list of twenty-
four pratyayas in the Paṭṭhāna, a Theravāda Abhidharma text (cf. Frauwallner 1995:
50f.; Conze 1967: 150-153; La Valleé Poussin 1913a: 51f.; Hirakawa 1990: 179,
183f.; Skilling 1998: 145). The Paṭṭhāna includes both an anantarapratyaya and a
samanantarapratyaya; according to Buddhaghosa, these two have been explained
variously; see VM 534f. and Nyanatiloka 1975: 625f. Garfield's (1995: 108f.) pre-
sentation of the conditions in his commentary on MMK I.2 is unreliable.
Cf. also de La Vallée Poussin's references for pratyaya at PsP₁ 76, n. 7. Further
references in AKBhÅ II.244, n. 4; Lamotte 1980: 2164-2167; Skilling 1998.
The Akutobhayā and the Chung Lun switch the order of MMK I.2 and I.3 (see ABhed
252, 254); Frauwallner (1958: 178f.) translates the kārikās according to the order
found in these texts.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
299
Among these [four, as regards the hetu], because the [defining]
characteristic 553 (lakṣaṇa) [has been formulated as] "The cause (hetu)
is that which brings forth (nirvartaka),” [it] obviously (hi) [follows
that] the [thing] which brings forth something [i.e.,] is available as the
seed (bīja), is the cause condition (hetupratyaya) of that [other
thing].554 The [specific] object support (arambana) by virtue of which
the factor (dharma) in the process of arising arises is the object
553
I usually translate lakṣaṇa in the present section as "[defining] characteristic" even
though-especially in the case of “nirvartako hetuḥ”—“definition” might also be
appropriate. lakṣaṇa primarily denotes the essential and constitutive ontological
characteristic of a thing the lakṣaṇa of a thing makes that thing what it is,
constitutes its "Sosein." "nirvartako hetuḥ" considered as a definition can therefore
be understood to represent the formulation, the linguistic indication, of the essential
characteristic of the hetupratyaya; that is: lakṣaṇam ucyate. I have refrained from
translating lakṣaṇa in the present section as “definition” because, as will become
clear in his arguments against the individual four conditions, Candrakīrti's focus is
primarily on the actual essential characteristic of each condition.
554 Reference to the formulation nirvartako hetuḥ also appears in MMK 1.7c. In
Bhāviveka's commentary on MMK I.7, fellow Buddhists attribute this definition to
the Buddha (de ltar yang bcom ldan 'das kyis rgyu ni sgrub par byed pa’o [PP D
58b4; P 70b1]). Candrakīrti sets forth two presentations of conditions in the MABh
(the first attributed to kha cig, the second to gzhan dag); the hetupratyaya as
elucidated here in the PsP appears in the second presentation (sgrub par byed pa ni
rgyu yin no zhes bya ba'i mtshan nyid las gang zhig gang gi skyed pa sa bon gyi ngo
bor gnas pa de ni de'i rgyu'i rkyen yin la [MABhed 88.10-12]). In the first
presentation, the hetupratyaya is explained as rgyu’i rkyen ni byed rgyu ma gtogs pa’i
rgyu lnga, i.e., as it is described in the AK and AKBh (AK II.61d: hetvākhyaḥ pañca
hetavaḥ; AKBhed 98.7: kāraṇahetuvarjyāḥ pañca hetavo hetupratyayaḥ). Bhāviveka
also explains the hetupratyaya of MMK I.2 as it is described in the AK, listing the
five types of hetu it includes: de la rgyu'i rkyen ni lhan cig 'byung ba dang | skal ba
mnyam pa dang mtshungs par ldan pa dang | kun tu 'gro ba dang | rnam par smin pa
zhes bya ba ni rgyu Inga po dag (PP D 53b3-4; P 64b4-5); Ames (1994: 93)
translates, "As to that, the causal condition [which is] the cause (hetu-pratyaya)
[consists of] the five [types of] cause [known as] the simultaneously arisen (saha-
bhū), the similar (sabhāga), the conjoined (samprayukta), the universal (sarvatraga),
and [the cause of] maturation (vipāka).” The author of the ABh makes the brief
comment: rgyu’i rkyen ni bskyed pa’i don gyis (ABhed 254.10-11). Buddhapālita does
not offer definitions for any of the conditions at this point.
On hetupratyaya, see also n. 552.300
TRANSLATION
condition (ārambaṇapratyaya) of that [factor].555 The immediately
preceding (anantara) cessation (nirodha) of the cause (kāraṇa) is the
condition for the arising of the effect; for example, the immediately
preceding cessation of a seed is the condition for the arising of a
sprout. 556 The [condition] owing to the existence of which [some-
555 The defining characteristic of the object condition is formulated as utpadyamāno
dharmo yenārambaṇenotpadyate sa tasyārambaṇapratyayaḥ. The word dharma
(factor) in the formulation/definition also appears in MMK I.8, the kārikā that refutes
the possibility of an ārambaṇapratyaya. That dharma here in the definition is re-
stricted to consciousnesses and mental factors is made clear in Candrakīrti's com-
mentary on MMK I.8. (on consciousnesses and mental factors relying on an ālamba-
na, cf. AK II.34bc: cittacaitasāḥ | sāśrayālambanākārāḥ and AKBhed 62.5-6: sāla-
mbanā viṣayagrahaṇāt).
According to the AK, ārambaṇapratyaya comprises all factors of existence, for
whereas the visual, auditory, gustatory, olfactory and tangible consciousnesses have
limited spheres of activity, mental consciousness apprehends all factors; AK II.62c:
ālambanam sarvadharmāḥ; AKBhed 100.4-6: yathāyogam cakṣurvijñānasya sasam-
prayogasya rūpam | śrotravijñānasya śabdaḥ ... manovijñānasya sarvadharmāḥ. This
description of ārambaṇapratyaya as comprising all factors is reflected in the first
presentation of the pratyayas in the MABh: de la dmigs par bya bas (MABhun: byas
for bya bas) na dmigs pa ste || ci rigs par rnam par shes pa drug gi dmigs pa chos
thams cad ni dmigs pa’i rkyen no || (MABhed 88.5-6). The second presentation in the
MABh contains a definition of ārambaṇapratyaya that is similar to, but more elabor-
ate than the one appearing in the PSP: skyes bu rgan po ldang ba ltar sems dang sems
las byung ba rgyu las skye (MABhun: skyes) bzhin pa rnams rten mkhar (MABhun:
khar) ba dang 'dra ba'i dmigs pa gang gis bskyed par 'gyur ba de ni dmigs pa'i rkyen
te | skye bzhin pa’i chos kyi rten yin no | (MABhed 88.12-15; de La Vallée Poussin
translates, “le point d'appui, semblable à un bâton d'appui, grâce auquel sont en-
gendrés la pensée et ses succédanés naissant de la cause, semblables à un homme âgé
qui se lève, c'est l'ālambana pratyaya, car il est le point d'appui de la chose nais-
sante" [MABh₁ 1910: 286; de La Vallée Poussin's "car" is not in MABh Tib).
Candrakīrti relies on this example to explain ārambaṇa in his commentary on YŞ 26:
brten par bya bas dmigs pa ste || Idang mi nus pa rnams Idang bar byed pa’i 'khar ba
bzhin no || (YȘVed 65.15-16). Bhāviveka cites the AK in regard to this pratyaya:
dmigs pa'i rkyen ni chos thams cad (PP D 53b4; P 64b5). The author of the ABh
comments: dmigs pa'i rkyen ni rten gyi don gyis (ABhed 254.11-12).
556 The defining characteristic of the immediately preceding condition is formulated
as kāraṇasyānantaro nirodhaḥ kāryasyotpattipratyayaḥ. Of interest here is Candra-
kīrti's example, according to which (sam)anantarapratyaya refers to the cessation of
a material object, and not specifically to mental dharmas. The views expressed in the
AK and AKBh restrict samanantarapratyaya to consciousness and mental factors
(AK II.62ab: cittacaittā acaramā utpannāḥ samanantaraḥ “Arisen consciousnesses
and mental factors, with the exception of the final ones [of Arhats entering nirvāṇa],PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
301
thing] comes into being is the dominant [condition] for that [thing]
(yasmin sati yad bhavati tat tasyadhipateyam).557 These are the four
tr
are the samanantara [condition]"). This restriction is explained as entailed by the
prefix sam, understood in the sense of sama: samaś cāyam anantaraś ca pratyaya iti
samanantarapratyayaḥ | ata eva rūpam na samanantarapratyayo visamotpatteḥ
(AKBhed 98.10-11; AKVy 232.18: samānārthe samśabdaḥ). The cause and result of
material dharmas are not "equal" in the cases where an individual produces from one
material cause such as the Prātimokṣa vow not one, but two, avijñaptirūpas at the
same time in two different spheres, i.e., in Kāmadhātu and Rūpadhātu (see AKBhtr
II.300f. and n. 5) or when a lesser or greater effect arises from its cause, such as a
small heap of ashes from a pile of straw (cf. AKBhed 98.12-17). This view that
(sam)anantarapratyaya applies only to consciousness and mental factors is found in
the first group of explanations of the pratyayas set forth by Candrakīrti in the MABh:
phung po lhag ma med par mya ngan las 'das par 'jug pa'i sems las gzhan pa'i sems
dang sems las byung ba rnams ni de ma thag pa'i rkyen no || (MABhed 88.7-9;
MABhr 1910: 285). The second presentation, however, contains the description of
(sam)anantarapratyaya as it is set forth in the PsP: rgyu 'gags ma thag pa ni 'bras bu
skye ba’i rkyen yin te | dper na sa bon 'gags ma thag pa myu gu’i tshungs pa de ma
thag pa'i rkyen yin pa lta bu'o || (MABhed 88.15-17; MABh 1910: 286). Bhāviveka's
explanation of (sam)anantarapratyaya conforms to the AK's: de ma thag pa’i rkyen
ni sems dang sems las byung ba skyes pa rnams las tha ma ma gtogs pa'o (PP D
53b4; P 64b5). The author of ABh comments: de ma thag pa'i rkyen ni bar du ma
chod pa'i don gyis (ABhed 254.12-13). On samanantarapratyaya in the Sarvāstivāda
school, see also Cox 1995: 117f.
The author of the *LT states that the definition for this condition derives from the
Vaibhāṣika school: hetor nirodho vaibhāṣikeṇotpat[t]ipratyaya uktaḥ (cf. Yonezawa
2004: 125, 148 [fol. 3a3]).
557 The adhipatipratyaya (= ādhipateya) is equated to the kāraṇahetu (the “general
cause"; see also n. 552) in the AK and AKBh: AK II.62d: kāraṇākhyo 'dhipaḥ
smrtaḥ; the AKBh states that although the adhipatipratyaya and the ārambaṇa-
pratyaya have equal extension, i.e., encompass all dharmas, dharmas that arise to-
gether with [another] factor are never the ārambaṇa condition, whereas all dharmas
do serve as the adhipatipratyaya for a single dharma coming into existence (cf.
AKBhed 100.14-16: ālambanapratyayo 'pi sarvadharmāḥ adhipatipratyayo 'pīti kim
asty ādhikyam | na jātu sahabhuvo dharmā ālambanaṁm bhavanti | bhavanti tv adhi-
patipratyaya ity asyaivādhikyam; AKVy 236.8: ālambanapratyayo 'pi sarvadharmā
iti manovijñānāpekṣayā). The AK definition of the adhipatipratyaya is found in the
first group of explanations of the four pratyayas in the MABh: byed rgyu ni bdag po'i
rkyen yin no (MABhed 88.9). As in the case of the other pratyayas Candrakīrti de-
scribes in the PSP, he does not rely on the AK for his explanation of this pratyaya,
turning instead to another source. The description found in the second group of ex-
planations of the pratyayas in the MABh corresponds with that of the PsP: gang zhig
yod na gang 'byung ba de ni de’i bdag po’i rkyen yin no (MABhed 88.17-18).
Bhāviveka relies on the AK for his explanation of this pratyaya: bdag po'i rkyen ni302
TRANSLATION
conditions. And others, such as the prenascent (purojāta), the
conascent (sahajāta), the postnascent (paścājjāta), and so forth, are
included in just these [four].558 The Lord (īśvara) and so forth, on the
byed pa'i rgyu (PP D 53b4; P64b5); however, in his commentary on MMK I.7 and
his introduction to MMK I.10, his "fellow Buddhist” asserts the definition given by
Candrakīrti. The author of the ABh comments: bdag po’i rkyen ni dbang byed pa’i
don gyis (ABhed 254.13-14). Although Buddhapālita does not define this pratyaya at
this point, he introduces MMK I.10 with the objection of an opponent who defines
the adhipateyapratyaya in a way similar to that found in the PsP: bdag po nyid ni yod
do || bdag po'i dngos po ni bdag po nyid de | de yang mdor bsdu na gang yod na gang
'byung ba dang | gang med na gang mi 'byung ba de ni de’i bdag po nyid (BP ed 24.19-
21).
558 The purojāta, sahajāta and paścājjāta pratyayas constitute three of the twenty-
four pratyayas of the Theravāda Paṭṭhāna (Pāli: purejāta, sahajāta, pacchājāta, re-
spectively numbers 10, 6 and 11 of the list); see Conze 1967: 283, n. 11; Hirakawa
1990: 183f. The same list is found in VM 532 (see Nyanatiloka 1975: 622f.). The
sahajātapratyaya is explained in the VM as the condition which through its simultan-
eous generation acts as a supportive factor, like lamplight for illumination (uppajja-
māno va saha uppādanabhāvena upakārako dhammo sahajātapaccayo, pakāsassa
padīpo viya); purojātapratyaya as a previously arisen condition which through its
existence is a supportive factor, like the visual sense faculty for visual consciousness
(paṭhamataram uppajjitvā vattamānabhāvena upakārako dhammo purejātapaccayo);
the paścajjātapratyaya as a non-material factor which supports through supporting
the material factors, like the desire for and a will [to eat] food the bodies of young
vultures (purejātānam rūpadhammānam upatthambhakattena upakārako arūpa-
dhammo pacchājātapaccayo, gijjhapotakasarīrānam āhārāsā cetanā viya; see VM
535-538; Nyanatiloka 1975: 626-630). The sahajātapratyaya corresponds to the
sahabhūhetu of the Sarvāstivādin hetu list (Skilling 1998: 145, n. 28); it is found as
the sixth pratyaya in the list of ten pratyayas in the Śāriputrābhidharmaśāstra (cf.
Hirakawa 1990: 183). A statement similar to that of the PsP appears in the MABh:
yang rkyen gzhan gang dag lhan cig skyes pa dang phyi nas skyes pa la sogs pa de
dag kyang 'di rnams kyi nang du 'dus pa yin no || (MABhed 88.19-20).
Bhāviveka, commenting on MMK I.2d, refers to purojātapratyaya and two other
pratyayas, namely, atthipratyaya and natthipratyaya, also found in the Paṭṭāna list,
stating, like Candrakīrti, that such additional pratyayas are included in the four
asserted by Nāgārjuna: sde pa gzhan gyis (P: gyi) yongs su brtags pa'i rkyen mdun du
skyes pa dang yod pa dang | med pa rnams kyang 'di dag nyid du 'dus pa'i phyir (PP
D 53b3; P 64b3-4). As Ames (1994: 122, n. 3) notes, Avalokitavrata specifies the
"other" school as the Ārya-Sthaviras. On atthipratyaya and natthiprayaya, see VM
540f. and Nyanatiloka 1975: 633f.
*LT's author uses the example of the timira disorder to show that purojātapratyaya is
subsumed under ādhipateyapratyaya: timir[ā]dhipatyena keśoṇḍ[u]kadarśanam (ms:
keśoṇḍūkaᵒ) iti adhipatiḥ. He states that sahajātapratyaya is referred to by the Vai-303
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
other hand, are simply not possible as conditions.559 Just on account
of this, [the Exalted One] makes the restriction, "There is not a fifth
condition." Therefore, because things arise from these [four condi-
tions that are] other, there is arising from other.
§125. Regarding this, we reply: There is of course no arising of things
from conditions that are other. Because,
[MMK I.3]
An own-being (svabhāva) of things of course does not exist in
conditions and such;
When own-being does not exist, other-being (parabhāva) does
not exist.560
bhāṣikas as sahabhūpratyaya, and appears to subsume paścajjātapratyaya under
adhipateyapratyaya (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 125f., 148f. [fol. 3a3-4]).
559 After stating in the MABh that the sahajāta and paścājjāta pratyayas, etc., are
included in the four pratyayas, Candrakīrti denies that things such as the Lord are
conditions, citing MMK I.2d as support (cf. MABhed 88.20-89.2).
560 Candrakīrti cites MMK I.3: na hi svabhāvo bhāvānāṁ pratyayādiṣu vidyate |
avidyamāne svabhāve parabhāvo na vidyate || (given in Ye 2011a as MMK I.2). This
kārikā appears in ABh and Chung Lun as MMK I.2; MMK I.2 of BP, PP and PsP
appears in these two texts as MMK I.3. The author of the ABh sees his second kārikā
(= PsP's MMK I.3) as explaining MMK I.1's assertion that no things ever arise
anywhere from self, other, both or causelessly. He explains: 1) because an own-being
of things does not exist in the conditions, etc., it is not tenable that things arise from
self; 2) because other-being does not exist owing to own-being not existing, it is not
tenable that things arise from other; 3) because [both] own-being and other-being do
not exist, it is not tenable that things arise from both; and 4) because [the thesis of
arising] causelessly is simply base, it is not tenable that things arise in this way
(ABhed 253.10-19: gang gi phyir dngos po rnams kyi rang bzhin rkyen la sogs pa dag
la yod pa ma yin pa de'i phyir dngos po rnams bdag las skye bar mi 'thad do || gang
gi phyir bdag gi dngos po yod pa ma yin na | gzhan gyi dngos po yod pa ma yin pa
de'i phyir dngos po rnams gzhan las skye bar mi 'thad do || bdag gi dngos po dang
gzhan gyi dngos po yod pa ma yin pas dngos po rnams gnyis la (read as D and C: las)
skye bar mi 'thad do || rgyu med pa ni tha chad kho na yin pas de las kyang dngos po
rnams skye bar mi 'thad do); see also Oetke 2001a: 42, n. 18. This explication is quite
different from that given by Buddhapālita, Bhāviveka and Candrakīrti, all of whom
view the kārikā as refuting only the thesis of arising from other. One has to admit
that the ABh commentary, in interpreting the kārikā as an elucidation of MMK I.1,
seems somewhat forced.304
TRANSLATION
For if there would be the existence (sattva), prior to [their] arising, of
things [i.e.], of effects, somewhere in the conditions that are other,
such as in the cause, [that is], [either] in the collective (samasta)
[conditions], in the individual (vyasta) [conditions], in the collective
and individual (vyastasamasta) [conditions], or in something other
than the collection of cause and conditions there might be arising
from those [conditions]. But it is not like this, [i.e.,] that there would
be existence (sadbhava) prior to arising. If there were [prior
existence], it would be apprehended, and arising would be pointless.
Therefore, there is not own-being in the conditions and such 561 of
things. And when own-being does not exist, there is not other-being
562
Oetke (2001a: 40) rejects Weber-Brosamer and Back's translation of MMK I.3's hi
as "bekanntlich,” stating that it is questionable whether hi ever has this sense, and
that even if it might, hi almost exclusively means “denn” (“for”) in philosophical
texts, especially in the MMK. I agree that Nāgārjuna does usually intend hi in the
meaning "for" in the MMK (there are no cases in which it is merely a verse-filler)
but it is quite clear that Candrakīrti often employs hi in the meaning “of course,"
"naturally," i.e., as indicating that something is logically or empirically obvious, and
sometimes interprets the particle as used by Nāgārjuna, as in the case of MMK I.3, in
this way. See Oetke 2001a: 40ff. for further comments on MMK I.3. Garfield's
(1995: 112f.) interpretation of MMK I.3 as having the purpose of demonstrating that
conditions are simply useful explanans because "[w]hat we are typically confronted
with in nature is a vast network of interdependent and continuous processes"
overlooks the fact that Nāgārjuna nowhere appeals to the idea of “nature” or anything
else as a network, nor to the idea of the world as an interdependent complex.
"9
561 Both the author of the ABh and Buddhapālita claim that the word ādi in pratyayā-
dişu of MMK I.3 refers to the conditions taught by non-Buddhists. Bhāviveka
explains it in two different ways, in accord with the two explanations of MMK I.3 he
provides: he first explains ādi as referring to other conditions such as the [causal]
collection (tshogs) and the Lord, etc., and then as referring to the collection of causes
and common and uncommon conditions and other [conditions] (rgyu dang byed rgyu
thun mong dang | thun mong ma yin pa tshogs pa dang gzhan; see Ames 1994: 96 and
n. 26).
562 Although not exactly the same, a comparable argument is found in BP: 'di ltar gal
te dngos po rnams kyi rang bzhin rkyen rnams la 'am rkyen rnams las gzhan pa la
'’am | gnyi ga la yod par gyur na | yod pa la skye ba ci zhig bya ste dngos po rang
bzhin gyis yod pa rnams la yang skye bar brtag pa don med pa nyid du 'gyur (BPed
13.7-11).
For a comprehensive refutation of the possibility of effects either existing or not
existing in the causal complex of cause and conditions, see PsP on MMK XX.1-4.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
305
(parabhāva). "Being” (bhāva) [of "other-being" in the kārikā means]
"becoming" (bhavana), [that is,] “arising" (utpāda); "other-being"
[means] “arising from others"—that [arising from others] does not
exist. Therefore, this [tenet of yours] is not tenable, [namely, that
there is] the arising of things from [things] that are other.
563
§126. Alternatively, [the kārikā may be understood as meaning that]
there is not an own-being of things, [that is,] of effects such as a
sprout and so forth when the conditions such as a seed and so forth
exist [but are still] in an unmodified (avikṛta) form [i.e., have not
started to germinate], because of the consequence that [the effects,
i.e., the sprout and so forth] would be without a cause (nirhetuka)
[because the seed had not reached the state of causal efficacy]. In
reliance on what, then, would there be the otherness of conditions,
etc. 2564 For only when two things exist [at the same time, for example
Cp., e.g., the MMK XX.3 argument that an existing effect would be perceived: hetoś
ca pratyayānāṁ ca sāmagryām asti cet phalam | gṛhyeta nanu sāmagryām sāma-
gryām ca na grhyate ||; PSP₁ 392.8-9: yad yatrāsti tat tatra gṛhyate tadyathā kunde
dadhi | yac ca nāsti na tat tatra gṛhyate tadyathā sikatāsu tailam maṇḍūkajaṭāyām
siromaṇiḥ ||.
563 Bhāviveka also explains parabhāva as meaning “arising from others." Com-
menting on MMK I.3cd, he states: rkyen la sogs pa la bdag gi dngos po yod pa ma
yin na'o || gzhan gyi dngos po ni gzhan dag las 'byung ngo || 'byung ba ni skye ba ste
rkyen rnams la med do (PP D 54a3-4; P 65a5-6). Considering MMK I.3ab as pro-
viding two reasons (chos = phyogs kyi chos), and 1.3cd as expressing the probandum
(sgrub par bya ba'i don), he constructs two inferences based on this interpretation of
the kārikā: don dam par mig la sogs pa skye mched rnams khu chu dang khrag la sogs
pa rkyen rnams las skye ba med de | de dag la med pa'i phyir dper na bum pa bzhin
no | de bzhin du don dam par khu chu dang khrag la sogs pa'i rkyen rnams mig la
sogs pa'i skye mched rnams skyed par byed pa ma yin te de dag gis stong pa'i phyir
dper na thag bzangs la sogs pa bzhin no (PP D 54a4-5; P 65a7-65b1); “Ultimately,
the bases, the visual faculty, etc., do not arise from conditions such as semen and
blood, etc., because they do not exist in those [conditions], [just] as a pot [does not
exist in them and arise from them]'; similarly, ‘Ultimately, conditions such as semen
and blood, etc., do not produce the bases such as the visual faculty, etc., because they
are empty/devoid of them, [just] as a loom, etc., [are empty/devoid of them and do
not produce them]" (also translated in Ames 1994: 95).
"
564 The same argument is found in the commentary on MA VI.17 (MA VI.17: asty
ankuraś ca na hi bījasamānakālo kutaḥ paratayāstu vinā paratvam | janmāṁkurasya
na hi sidhyati tena bījāt samtyajyatām parata udbhavatīti pakṣaḥ ||; (Li 2012: 5; the306
TRANSLATION
the persons] Maitra and Upagupta, is there otherness with regard to
each other; but there is not similarly the simultaneity of seed and
sprout. Therefore, when an own-being of effects is not existing, there
is not other-being (parabhāva), [i.e.,] the otherness (paratva) of seeds
and so forth. Thus, precisely on account of [the fact that] a designa-
tion as "other" is not [possible], there is not arising from other.³
565
first pāda of the verse as cited in the Subhāṣitasangraha is unmetrical [cf. MABhr
1910: 290, n. 2]), in which Candrakīrti cites and explicates MMK I.3. He asserts that
when the conditions, etc., have an unmodified own-being, an own-being of effects
absolutely cannot exist, because it has not arisen; and if that does not exist, there is
not other-being of the conditions, that is, their being other than the effect is not possi-
ble: 'dir rkyen la sogs pa zhes bya ba ni rgyu’am rkyen dag gam | rgyu dang rkyen gyi
tshogs pa’am de las gzhan yang rung ste | rang bzhin rnam par ma gyur pa na 'bras
bu rnams kyi rang bzhin yod pa ma yin pa kho na ste ma skyes pa'i phyir ro || de med
na rkyen la sogs pa rnams la gzhan nyid yod pa ma yin no || (MABhed 93.9-13).
Candrakīrti explains in the following sentence that the locative of MMK I.3's pratya-
yādiṣu should be understood according to Pā 2.3.37, that is, as a locative absolute:
yasya ca bhāvena bhāvalakṣanam "By the action of whatsoever the time of another
action is indicated, that takes the seventh case-affix” (Vasu 1980: 292; correct de La
Vallée Poussin's reference "Pāṇini iii, 3, 37" in MABh 1910: 291, n. 2 to “Pāṇini ii,
3, 37”. The Kāś clarifies that bhāva refers to an action [bhāvaḥ kriyā | yasya ca
bhāvena yasya ca kriyayā kriyāntaram lakṣyate, tato bhāvavataḥ saptamī vibhaktir
bhavati], and supplies the examples goșu duhyamānāsu gataḥ, dugdhāsv āgataḥ,
agniṣu hūyamāneṣu gataḥ, huteṣv āgataḥ).
*LT's author displays a similar understanding of the second interpretation of MMK
I.3 as that presented above: nirhetukatvam iti {|} yady asti svabhāvas tadā hetunā kim
kartavyam | svabhāvotpādanārtham hetur anvi{ne}syate | (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 126,
149 [fol. 3a4-5]).
See also MA VI.18 and 19 for Candrakīrti's refutation of the opponent's assertion
that the perishing of the seed and arising of the sprout occurs simultaneously, a sim-
ultaneity that, according to the opponent, would allow for the otherness of condition
and effect.
565 Candrakīrti again relies on his commentary on MA VI.17 for the reference to
Maitra and Upagupta: 'di na byams pa dang nyer sbas yod bzhin pa dag kho na phan
tshun bltos nas gzhan nyid du mthong gi | sa bon dang myu gu dag ni de ltar cig car
dmigs pa yang ma yin te | sa bon rnam par ma gyur par myu gu med pa’i phyir ro ||
gang gi tshe de Itar sa bon dang dus mnyam du myu gu yod pa ma yin pa de'i phyir sa
bon la myu gu las gzhan nyid yod pa ma yin la gzhan nyid med na gzhan las myu gu
skye'o zhes bya ba 'di yod pa ma yin no || (MABhed 92.16-93.3). A similar argument,
with the points of comparison Caitra and Gupta instead of Maitra and Upagupta,
appears in BP: 'di la dngos po yod pa rnams gcig la gcig ltos nas gzhan nyid du 'gyur
ba ni dper na cai-tra las gub-ta gzhan du 'gyur la gub-ta las kyang cai-tra gzhan du
'gyur ba lta bu yin na gnas skabs gang na sa bon la sogs rkyen rnams yod pa'i gnas
|PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
307
§127. Therefore, the opponent (para) is simply unaware of the intent
of the agama [when it declares the four conditions], for the Tathā-
gatas do not utter a statement contradicted by reasoning (yukti-
viruddha); and the intent of agama [in this connection] was already
given earlier.566
§128. Then when the proponent of arising from conditions has been
rebuffed in this way, the proponent of arising from activity (kriyā)
conjectures, "It is not the case that conditions such as the visual
skabs de na myu gu la sogs pa dngos po rnams yod pa ma yin te | de’i phyir rgyu la
sogs pa rkyen rnams yod pa na myu gu la sogs pa dngos po rnams kyi rang bzhin yod
pa ma yin no || de rnams kyi bdag gi dngos po yod pa ma yin na rgyu la sogs pa dag ji
Itar gzhan du 'gyur | de lta bas na rgyu la sogs po (read: pa) rkyen rnams myu gu la
sogs pa dngos po rnams las gzhan nyid yin par mi 'thad do (BPed 12.7-15; see BPtr
12). Buddhapālita presents this interpretation of the kārikā as the first of the two
interpretations provided by him.
The sentence ayuktam etat parata utpadyante bhāvā iti is written in ms Q's upper
margin, and is marked to be inserted after paravyapadeśābhāvād eva na parata
utpāda iti. Ms P's folio has broken off after tasmād avidyamāne svabhāve kāryā[nām]
and its reading thus cannot be accessed. None of the paper manuscripts (B, D, J, L)
attest the sentence. A translation for the sentence, however, appears in PsP Tib:
dngos po rnams gzhan las skye'o zhes bya ba 'di ni mi rung ngo ||. The sentence
indeed reflects and rejects the concluding statement given by the opponent for arising
from other, i.e., tasmād ebhyaḥ parabhūtebhyo bhāvāvām utpatter asti parata utpa-
ttir. It seems, however, unnecessary and redundant: Candrakīrti already responded to
the reason given in the opponent's concluding statement at the end of his first inter-
pretation of MMK I.3 with tasmād ayuktam etat parabhūtebhyo bhāvānām utpattir.
After presenting his alternative interpretation of MMK I.3, Candrakīrti ends with the
words na parata utpādaḥ. The resultant redundancy and the fact that the sentence
ayuktam etat parata utpadyante bhāvā iti is missing from the paper manuscripts and
only occurs in Q's margin inclines one to suspect that it is an interpolation which was
received by Q from ms 0. It must have been in ms 8 for PSP Tib to have received it,
but like other interpolated readings in ms 8 that were not appropriated by ms (or
one of ms t's ancestors), it did not enter the paper manuscript line. For the above
reasons, I have not included the sentence in my edition. I do, however, admit that
from a paleographical standpoint, an eyeskip from iti of utpāda iti to iti of bhāva iti is
possible.
566 See the discussion at PSPM $71-§75 (PSP₁ 39.8-44.7). *LȚ's author states: vyava-
hāramātreṇoktaṁ | na tu tat[t]vata ity āgamābhiprāyaḥ (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 126, 149
[fol. 3a5]).308
faculty, visual form, etc., directly generate consciousness.567 Rather,
one speaks of conditions because [they] effect the activity of the
originating of consciousness (janikriyā). And that activity generates
consciousness.³
.568 Therefore, the activity consisting in the originating
TRANSLATION
567 The opponent here and in the following takes as his point of reference assertions
based on the Canonical statement cakṣuḥ pratītya rūpāṇi cotpadyate cakṣurvijñānam.
Cf. n. 67.
568 The activity of originating (jani) occurs, according to the Buddhist opponents, in
an entity that is in the process of originating (jāyamāna). The entity in the process of
originating is not merely a “half-arisen” thing (ardhajātaḥ) but is recognized as the
state just prior to that of the fully arisen thing; cf. Candrakīrti’s introduction to CŚ
XV.19: yasya nirodhena jātaḥ padārtho bhavati sa jāteḥ prāgavasthārūpo¹ rtho
jāyamāna ity ucyata iti (CŚȚed 364.2-3), ¹Suzuki notes that ms B reads jātaprāgᵒ,
HPS jāta(taḥ) prāgᵒ, CŚȚed Tib: skyes pa'i snga rol gyi; CŚ XV.19: jāyamāna-
nirodhena jāta utpadyate yataḥ | tato ʼnyasyāpi sadbhāvo jāyamānasya dṛśyate ||.
When the CST opponent is forced by Candrakīrti to admit that a jāyamāna thing is
actually something originated (jāta), i.e., something arisen, the opponent states that
the jāyamāna thing, although unoriginated (ajāta), is [only] called originated (jāta)
because it is "turned toward origination” (janmābhimukha), that is, is about to arise
(cf. CŚȚed 366.1-2). Compare AKBh ad AK III.28ab, where the Sautrāntika view of
arising is defended against Grammarians who have stated that the gerund suffix in
pratītya of pratītyasamutpāda implies that an already existing thing depends (on its
conditions). The Grammarians are informed that that which arises is something
future (anāgataḥ) which is "turned toward arising,” i.e., is about to, ready to, arise
(cf. AKBhed 138.14-15): kim avasthas cotpadyate | utpādābhimukho 'nāgataḥ
tadavastha eva pratyayam pratyetīty ucyate |. In response to the Grammarian's com-
plaint that an agent (kartṛ) as well as an action/activity (kriyā), expressly stated as
“becoming” (bhūti), is expected, it is replied that there is not an action of becoming
different from the agent (bhavitṛ), but that there is no fault in such linguistic usage
(cf. AKBhed 138.15-17). See, on the other hand, n. 572 for instances where Candra-
kīrti refers to the thing arising as both the agent (kartṛ) of and the basis (āśraya) for
the activity (kriyā).
ed
In Candrakīrti's introduction to CŚ XV.22ab, the opponent states that a thing in the
process of originating is affected by, under the influence of, the activity of arising:
utpattikriyayāvisyamāno hi padārtho jāyamāna iti (CŚȚ 366.12-13). The CŚT
opponent further states that a previously unoriginated thing becomes something that
is originating when it comes under the influence of the activity of originating (ato 'py
ajāta eva jāyamāno bhavati janikriyāveśakāle (CŚṬed 368.11-12). See also the de-
scription of the process of arising in the opponent's defense at PsP₁ 158.11-13:
yasmād ihotpattikriyāyuktam utpadyamānam iti vyapadiśyate | tasmād utpattau
satyām utpattim pratītyotpadyamānasiddher utpadyamānam evotpadyate (cf. also
PSP₁ 158.6: utpadyate iti vartamānakriyāviṣṭaḥ). The activity of arising (utpattikriyā)
does not occur in something arisen, for the activity fulfils its purpose with the com-PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
309
of consciousness, which possesses the conditions (pratyayavatī), is
the generator of consciousness, not the conditions, [just] as for boiled
rice the activity of cooking (pacikriyā) [produces it, not the
conditions, such as the pot or fire, etc.].'
99569
pletion of the entity's arising (utpanna ity uparatotpattikriya ucyate [PsP₁ 158.6]). At
PSP₁ 405.5-6, reference is made to the opponents' view that the effect is the agent of
the activity of arising (utpattikriyākartṛtvam phalasya) and that the cause is the
instigator of the activity of arising of the result (hetoḥ phalotpattikriyāprayojaka-
tvam). It is not clear if these statements represent the views of a single Buddhist
school or if some should be attributed to separate or sub-groups. In the PP on MMK
I.5, Bhāviveka expressly attributes to the Sautrāntika school the view that conditions
that have activity assist each other only at the time when the result originates (PP D
56b5-6; P 68a7: mdo sde pa dag na re | 'bras bu skye ba’i dus kho na rkyen bya ba
dang ldan pa rnams gcig la gcig phan 'dogs pas rkyen nyid du khas blangs pa'i phyir |
...). Cf. Ames 1994: 103.
In the PP on MMK I.4b where Guṇamati's comments are rejected, someone (kha cig
na re) according to Avalokitavrata, Bhāviveka himself-asserts in regard to the
process of arising that immediately after and as a result of the causal conditions as-
sisting each other, activity (*kriyā) capable of producing the result comes into being
and brings the thing on the point of arising into existence; and because this sequence
of events is not rejected on the everyday level, activity is also not rejected on this
level: kha cig na re rkyen rnams gcig la gcig phan 'dogs pas de ma thag pa’i skad
cig la 'bras bu bskyed nus pa'i bya ba bdag nyid thob pa’i skad cig gis dngos po skye
par 'dod pa skyed pa tha snyad du ma btang bas med pa nyid ma yin la | (PP D 55b6-
7; P 67a5-6) “Since the conditions assist each other, immediately following [the
mutual assistance of the conditions], the next moment [of the conditions] in which
the activity capable of producing the effect comes into being produces the entity that
has been on the verge of origination. Since [we] do not reject [this] conventionally, it
is not the case that [the activity of origination] does not exist [on the surface level]."
See also Ames 1994: 100.
It may be finally mentioned that in the PSP on MMK VII, in which the real existence
of the three characteristics (lakṣaṇa) propounded by the Sarvāstivādins, namely,
utpāda, sthiti and anityatā/nirodha, is rejected, the activity (kriyā) of utpadyamāna is
given as utpatti and that of tiṣṭhan/tiṣṭhamāna as sthiti.
569 Candrakīrti relies on his commentarial predecessors for the objection as found
here in the PsP: it appears in both BP and PP (see BPed 13.21-14.8; PP D 55a3-5, P
66a8-66b2). An abbreviated version of Buddhapalita's presentation of the argument
and his refutation of it is cited and criticized by Bhāviveka within his commentary on
MMK I.4a; Bhāviveka rejects Buddhapālita's critique as being a mere proposition
(dam bcas pa tsam; *pratijñāmātra). As Ames (1994: 125, n. 41) notes, Avalokita-
vrata identifies the opponents as the Vaibhāṣikas and the Sautrāntikas. Bhāviveka's
opponent, setting forth his objection in the form of an inference, specifies that the
activity of origination of visual consciousness possesses the conditions visual faculty,310
§129. Reply:
[MMK I.4a]
TRANSLATION
Activity (kriyā) that possesses conditions (pratyayavati) does not
[exist].570
If some activity existed, [then] it, possessing conditions by way of
conditions such as the visual faculty, might generate consciousness.
But it does not exist. Why [not]? This activity accepted in [your]
system (iha) is maintained in regard to either consciousness that has
[already] originated (jāta), [consciousness] that has not [yet] origin-
ated (ajāta) or [consciousness which is in the process of] originating
(jāyamāna). Among those [three alternatives, activity] is not appro-
priate in regard to [consciousness] that has [already] originated, for
activity brings about things; if the thing (bhāva) has [already] been
brought about, of what use is activity for it? And this has been
explained in the Madhyamakāvatāra by way of [statements] such as:
visible form, light, space and mental attention, and the activity of cooking the pot,
water, rice, fire and fuel. Buddhapālita refers to the person cooking, the pot, water,
fire, stove and so forth as the conditions which, each performing their respective
activities, effect the activity of cooking for the object cooked, i.e., boiled rice.
570 Candrakīrti cites MMK I.4a: kriyā na pratyayavatī. I translate the kārikā following
Candrakīrti's interpretation of it. The entire kārikā reads: kriyā na pratyayavatī
nāpratyayavatī kriyā | pratyayā nākriyāvantaḥ kriyāvantaś ca santy uta ||. A variety of
translations have been offered by classical and modern translators. Pa tshab,
following Candrakīrti’s interpretation, presents MMK I.4 as bya ba rkyen dang ldan
pa med || rkyen dang mi ldan bya ba med || bya ba mi ldan rkyen ma yin || bya ba ldan
yod 'on te na ||. He has merely slightly revised Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan's
earlier translation, which presents ma yin instead of pa med at the end of I.4a, and
yod instead of nam in I.4d. kriyā has been translated in different ways by modern
translators, e.g., as "energies" (Stcherbatsky 1927: 168), “Wirkung” (Frauwallner
1958: 179), "force" (Wood 1994: 284), "power to act" (Garfield 1995: 113); the last
three translations do not take the commentaries into consideration. Oetke (2001a:
43f.) takes issue with Weber-Brosamer and Back's (1997: 3) translation “Wirkkraft”
and considers Frauwallner's translation “Wirkung” (MMK I.4a: “Die Wirkung hat
keine Ursache ...") to render the thought more understandable, but admits that it is
arguable whether kriyā can be said to represent the same concept as phala. Kajiyama
(1963: 105) and Ames (1994: 98) respectively translate the PP's bya ba as
“Tätigkeit” and "activity."PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
311
And the origination (janma) once again of what has [already]
originated is simply not reasonable.571
[Activity] is also not appropriate in regard to [a thing] that has not
[yet] originated, because of statements such as
And without an agent (kartr) this [activity of] originating (jani) is
not tenable.572
Activity is also not possible in regard to a thing [which is in the
process of] originating, because something [in the process of]
originating, apart from what has [already] originated and what has not
[yet] originated, does not exist.573
571 Candrakīrti cites MA VI.8cd: jātasya janma punar eva ca naiva yuktam ||. The
verse was cited earlier at PSPM §21 (PsP₁ 13.7).
572 Candrakīrti cites MA VI.19d: kartrā vinā janir iyam na ca yuktarūpā || (Li 2012: 5;
MA VI.19 is cited in full at PsP₁ 545.9-12). Taking in his commentary on MA VI.19
the case of a sprout that is about to originate, Candrakīrti explains that the agent of
the activity of originating is the sprout; the sprout, however, being a thing of the
future, does not exist. The activity of originating, lacking a support (āśraya), thus
cannot exist: skye ba'i bya ba gang yin pa de’i byed pa po myu gu ni ma ’ongs pa yin
pa'i phyir yod pa ma yin pa nyid do || de med na yang rten med par 'di yod pa ma yin
(MABhed 96.1-3). Cp. Candrakīrti's argument against kriyā in his commentary on
MMK VII.17: athāghaṭāśrayeṇa kriyā prārabhyeta tad vaktavyam yo asāv aghaṭaḥ sa
kim bhavitum arhati pața uta naiva kimcit | yadi paṭa utpadyamānaḥ sa katham
utpannaḥ [san] ghaṭo bhavisyatīti | atha naiva kimcit katham tadāśrayā kriyā prava-
rtate | katham vā sa utpannaḥ san ghato bhaved (PsP₁ 161.6-9). See also his com-
mentary on CŚ XV.23abc, where the opponent points out that a thing in the process
of originating (jāyamāna) is indispensable as the support for the activity of origin-
ating, for what has not originated is incapable of providing support: na cābhūtasyāla-
bdhātmabhāvasya nirāśrayā janikriyā prava[rtitum u]tsahate (CŚȚed 368.13-14).
*LT's author also refers to the agent as the support for the activity of originating:
vijñānaṁ kartṛ tadabhāve tadāśritā kriyā katham bhavet (ms: bhaveda) | (cf. Yone-
zawa 2004: 126, 150 [fol. 3a5]).
573 Candrakīrti follows Buddhapālita in refuting activity by considering it with refer-
ence to consciousness already originated, not yet originated and in the process of
originating. Buddhapālita argues that activity does not function in consciousness
already originated because something already originated does not originate again, or
in consciousness not yet originated because then activity would be without a support
(gnas pa med), or in consciousness in the process of originating because there is not
something in the process of originating separate from what has already originated312
As it is stated [in the Catuḥśataka],
Because something [in the process of] originating (jāyamāna) is
half-originated, something [in the process of] originating does
not originate.
TRANSLATION
Alternatively, it follows that absolutely everything is [in the
process of] originating.
574
and what has not yet originated (see BPed 14.15-15.5). Bhāviveka briefly summarizes
this refutation of Buddhapālita's as rnam par shes pa skyes pa dang ma skyes pa dang
skye bzhin pa la rnam par shes pa skyed pa'i bya ba mi 'thad pa'i phyir, criticizing it
(and the opponent's argument as presented by Buddhapālita), as he is prone to, as a
"mere thesis" (see PP D 55a7-55b3; P 66b5-8). Of interest in Bhāviveka's commen-
tary on MMK I.4b is his citation of comments by Guṇamati, according to whom
MMK I.4a should be interpreted as a response to opponents who maintain that the
activity of origination is the nature of consciousness. MMK I.4a would thus teach
that when consciousness does not yet exist, activity, being its nature, also cannot
exist, and therefore the possessive affix “vať” (of pratyayavatī), is inappropriate (see
PP D 55b5-6; P 67a3-4; PPȚ D 171b1-6; P 198b8-199a8; Kajiyama 1964: 106f.;
Ames 1994: 99f.).
This refutation of the possibility of activity in things of the three times is found in
various forms in Madhyamaka literature (see, e.g., the refutation of gati/gamana in
MMK II, of utpatti and sthiti in MMK VII). See also CŚ XV.17 for a refutation of
kriyā, and ŚS kārikā 5 and the ŚSV for arguments against the possibility of arising in
the three times (ŚSVed 237f.)
574 Candrakīrti cites CŚ XV.16: jāyamānārdhajātatvāj jāyamāno na jāyate | atha vā
jāyamānatvam sarvasyaiva prasajyate ||. See Lang 1986: 140f. Candrakīrti, in his
commentary on the śloka, explains that if something in the process of originating is
conceived of as something partly originated and partly not originated, it does not
exist, because this would correspond to the already originated (*jāta) and that not yet
originated (*ajāta); there is not another third temporal aspect. If it is said to have the
nature of both something already originated and something not yet originated, then
the part that has originated does not originate, since it has just been stated in CŚ
XV.14 and commentary that what is existent does not originate; and the part that has
not originated likewise does not originate, since it has also been stated in CŚ XV.14
that what is not existent does not originate. On the other hand, if there is the process
of originating for what has already originated and what has not yet originated, then
the past and the future will be in the process of originating: gal te gang cung zad cig
skyes shing cung zad cig ma skyes pa de skye bzhin pa yin na | de Itar na ni 'o na skye
bzhin pa de yod pa ma yin te skyes pa dang ma skyes pa dag la rjes su zhugs pas
gzhan gsum pa skye bzhin pa’i dus kyi rnam pa med do || de'i phyir med pa nyid kyis
skye bzhin pa mi skye’o | gal te gnyi ga’i ngo bo skye (P: skyes) bzhin pa yin na ni de’i
phyir de'i gang cung zad gcig skyes pa de ni skyes pa'i khongs su gtogs pa’i phyir mi
skye ste dngos po ni mi skye'o zhes brjod pa'i phyir ro || de'i cung zad ma skyes pa313
And because in this way the activity of originating is impossible in
the three times, it does not exist. Precisely on account of that,
[Nāgārjuna] asserts, "Activity that possesses conditions does not
[exist]." This has been explained in the Madhyamakāvatāra with
statements such as,
There is not a qualifier without a qualificand.57
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
For one does not say that the son of a barren woman possesses a cow
(gomān).
gang yin pa de yang mi skye ste dngos po med pa mi skye'o zhes brjod pa'i phyir ro ||
ci ste skyes pa dang ma skyes pa dag la skye bzhin pa nyid (D: adds du) rtog na | de
Ita yin na 'das pa dang ma 'ongs pa gnyis kyang skye bzhin pa nyid du 'gyur ro
(CŚȚ P 258a8-258b3). See the continued discussion in CŚ XV.18-24 in which Ārya-
deva rejects the opponent's attempts to rescue jāyamāna; in the commentary on CŚ
XV.23 there is reference to the concept of utpattikriyā, the endowment with which,
according to the opponent, distinguishes something in the process of originating from
something not originated: yathājātāj jāyamāno bahiṣkṛtaḥ kriyāveśād evam jātād api
bahiṣkṛta evänispannarūpatvāt (CŚṬed 368.1-2).
575 Candrakīrti cites MA VI.57c: višeṣaṇam nāsti vinā višeṣyam (cf. Li 2012: 9). Here
in the PSP, the qualificand (viseṣya) is activity (kriyā) and its qualifier (viseṣaṇa) is
"possessing conditions” (pratyayavatī). kriyā, having been shown to be impossible,
cannot be qualified by conditions, i.e., cannot possess conditions.
MA VI.57c in the context of the MA and MABh can only mean “There is not a
qualificand without a qualifier,” because there the argumentation demonstrates that
the qualifier, not the qualificand, does not exist. The verse occurs in the refutation of
śakti as that which induces consciousness, and Candrakīrti explicitly states in his
commentary on MA VI.57c that consciousness is the qualifier and sakti the basis of
the qualification, i.e., the qualificand. In MA VI.57ab, he asserts that there cannot be
śakti either for a consciousness that has originated or for one that has not originated.
In his commentary on MA VI.57cd he takes as subject a consciousness that has not
yet originated, i.e., one not existing, stating that a consciousness which has not
originated cannot be taught either as something affirmed or negated, i.e., as “con-
sciousness" or "non-consciousness” (gang ma skyes pa de ni rnam par shes pa 'am |
rnam par shes pa ma yin zhes bya bar dgag pa dang sgrub pa'i ngo bos bstan par mi
nus so ||) and as such cannot be the qualifier for śakti. If one nevertheless attributes
sakti to consciousness which has not originated, then sakti could also be attributed to
the son of a barren woman (see MABhed 148.7-17).
Pa tshab presumably copied MA VI.57c directly from MA Tib, for PSP Tib reads:
khyad par med par khyad par can yod min ||.314
§130. [The opponent argues:] If in this way [activity possessing
conditions does not exist], then [activity] will exist as [something]
that does not possess conditions.
TRANSLATION
§131. Since this is also not tenable, [Nāgārjuna] states,
[MMK 1.4b]
Activity that does not possess conditions does not [exist].³
576
When [activity] that possesses conditions does not exist, then how
would [activity] that does not possess conditions, [that is, activity]
without a cause, exist? For if it is thought that it is not tenable that
cloth is made from threads, it is not [then] maintained that it is made
from fragrant grass!577 Therefore, activity is not the generator of
things (bhāvajanika).
576 Candrakīrti cites MMK I.4b: nāpratyayavatī kriyā |.
577 Candrakīrti interprets MMK I.4b as meaning that the opponent's proposal of
activity without conditions is absurd because this would mean that it has no cause,
and nothing exists without a cause. The example of cloth made from threads is meant
to provide a parallel for activity with conditions, and cloth made from fragrant grass
(used to make mats, not cloth) is meant as a parallel for activity without conditions.
The fragrant grass is presumably intended in the sense of no cause, that is to say,
cloth without threads as conditions would be without a cause (nirhetuka), and nothing
else, such as fragrant grass, can serve as cloth's conditions. apratyayavatī of 1.4b is
thus taken to be a possessive adjective with alpha privative (a + pratyayavatī). This
interpretation of the quarter considers I.4b to parallel I.4d. Pa tshab seems to have
understood Candrakīrti as I do, for he does not tamper with Jñānagarbha and Klu’i
rgyal mtshan's translation of the quarter (rkyen dang mi ldan bya ba). One could also
consider that apratyayavatī is a possessive adjective composed of a nañ-karmadhāra-
ya and a possessive suffix (apratyaya + vatī); in the latter case, the verse-quarter
would mean "Activity that possesses non-conditions does not exist." Fragrant grass
would then illustrate a non-condition, and the quarter would be rejecting the possibil-
ity that activity might possess conditions that are not its own true conditions. The
interpretation of the quarter which takes apratyayavatī as a possessive adjective with
alpha privative, however, better suits the consequence pointed out by Candrakīrti,
namely, that activity would be without a cause (nirhetuka). Candrakīrti provides only
general remarks on MMK XX.24b (MMK XX.24ab: na sāmagrīkṛtam tasmān nāsā-
magrīkṛtam phalam ): yadā sāmagrīkṛtam phalam na sambhavati tadā katham
atyantaviruddham asāmagrīkṛtam bhaviṣyati | asāmagrīkṛtam iti phalam na sambha-
vati || (PsP₁ 407.3-4), and in this case PsP Tib translates asāmagrīkṛtam as tshogs min
byas pa. It might be noted that when Candrakīrti comments on MMK I.1's rejectionPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
315
§132. In regard to this, [the opponent] says: If activity is thus im-
possible, then conditions will be the generators (janaka) of things.
§133. Reply:
[MMK I.4c]
Conditions that do not possess activity do not [exist].³
578
When activity does not exist, then how without activity, [that is,] not
possessing activity, [and thus] without a cause (nirhetuka), [could]
conditions be generators?57⁹
of things arising from no cause (ahetutaḥ), no cause is taken to refer to no cause at all
and also to non-causes.
Buddhapālita interprets the quarter as meaning that activity without conditions does
not exist, and repeats his arguments on MMK I.1 against arising from no cause: 'di
ltar rkyen dang mi ldan pa’i bya ba med do || gal te yod par gyur na rtag tu thams cad
las thams cad skye bar 'gyur ro || de lta yin na rtsom pa thams cad don med pa nyid
du 'gyur bas de yang mi 'dod de | de’i phyir rkyen dang mi ldan pa’i bya ba yang mi
'thad (BPed 15.9-12). Bhāviveka interprets the quarter to mean that activity without
conditions, i.e., not characterized by the possession of causal conditions, does not
exist.
578 Candrakīrti cites MMK I.4c: pratyayā nākriyāvantaḥ.
579 Candrakīrti has presented an opponent who acquiesces to the refutation of activity
set forth in the two previous verse-quarters but argues for conditions as the primary
generators of things. Candrakīrti rejects this position on the ground that conditions
require activity in order to be generators; given that activity has been proven to be
non-existent, conditions lack the cause that would render them generators. *LT's
author, on the other hand, understands nirhetuka to mean without causal function:
nirhetukāḥ {|} ahetava ity arthaḥ (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 126, 150 [fol. 3a6]).
Buddhapālita addresses an opponent who attempts to rescue the establishment of
things and their arising by arguing from the existence of conditions (BPed 15.13-14:
re zhig rkyen rnams ni yod do || de dag yod pas dngos po 'grub po || de grub pas skye
ba 'grub po). Buddhapālita, like Candrakīrti, explains the quarter by relying on the
earlier refutation of activity, stating that the visual faculty and so forth might be the
conditions of visual consciousness through their bringing about the activity of origin-
ation, but since activity does not exist, there is obviously not something that brings it
about; therefore the visual faculty and so forth cannot be conditions for the activity of
originating. He adds that should they be considered conditions even without the
existence of activity, everything would be the condition of everything and everything
would arise from everything (see BPed 15.17-16.2). Bhāviveka addresses an opponent
who sets forth the inference that conditions such as the visual faculty produce visual
consciousness because they possess activity, like a seed, etc., produces a sprout. He316
§134. But if [the opponent argues:] Only [conditions] that possess
activity [are] generators, [Nāgārjuna] replies,
[MMK I.4d]
And [conditions] that possess activity definitely do [not] exist.580
[The negative particle] "not" (na) [of "do not [exist]" of the previous
quarter has] a connection with the topic of discussion [i.e., this
quarter]. The word "definitely" (uta) is [used] here in [the sense of]
restriction.581 There [in the first two quarters] the non-existence of
TRANSLATION
responds that because origination has been refuted on the ultimate level, and since
the activity of origination does not exist, conditions do not possess activity, and not
possessing it, they are not suitable as conditions: 'di la don dam par skye ba bkag pa'i
phyir bya ba med pas sa bon la sogs pa rkyen rnams de dang ldan pa ma yin la | bya
ba dang mi ldan pa rnams ni rkyen du mi rung ... (PP D 56b2-3; P 67b1-2).
580 Candrakīrti cites MMK I.4d: kriyāvantaś ca santy uta ||.
581 The commentators on MMK I.4d elucidate the quarter in different ways.
Buddhapālita states that the negation na is to be supplied from I.4.c, but does not
comment on uta; he may understand na uta in its natural sense of "also ... not" /
"not ... either" (thus, "And [conditions] that possess activity also do not exist" /
"And [conditions] that possess activity do not exist either”). He states: ma yin zhes
bya ba’i skabs de dang sbyar te rkyen rnams bya ba dang ldan pa ma yin no || bya ba
rkyen dang ldan pa ma yin pa dang rkyen dang mi ldan pa med pa de ni sngar rab tu
bstan pa kho na yin no || bya ba med na ji ltar rkyen rnams bya ba dang Idan par
'gyur (BPed 16.7-10). As Saito (1984: 224, n. 16) has asserted in his remarks on the
commentators' interpretations of the particle uta, this explanation of Buddhapālita's
indicates that MMK I.4d as found in the canonical editions of BP should be corrected
from bya ba ldan nam 'on te na to read bya ba ldan yod 'on te na, as it is found in the
PSP. That the quarter appears as it does in BP is a consequence of Jñānagarbha and
Klu'i rgyal mtshan having inserted the translation of the MMK they had made in
reliance on PP and PPT into their subsequent translation of BP (see Saito 1984:
xviif.). Bhāviveka presents the quarter twice (PP Tib: bya ba Idan nam 'on te na),
initially without commenting on uta but possibly understanding it in a restrictive
sense (see Saito 1984: 224, n. 16; Ames 1994: 126, n. 58) or in the more natural
sense of "also" “either.” Bhāviveka then explains uta as indicating an alternative ('on
te na zhes bya ba’i sgra ni rnam par brtag pa'i don), such that, according to Saito
(1984: 224, n. 16), MMK I.4cd would mean "Conditions are neither without action,
nor in possession of action" (see also Ames' [1994: 102] translation following PPT).
Avalokitavrata provides yet another interpretation of the quarter (in regard to
Bhāviveka's initial citation of it), according to which uta is to be taken as indicating
an alternative within MMK I.4d itself, with the quarter thus expressing a question
directed toward the opponent. The quarter would translate, "Do [conditions] thatPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
317
activity was asserted; [so] how [could] the conditions possess
activity? And also things (bhāva) such as the activity of cooking
(pacikriyā) should be understood as having been declared [to be] the
same as the activity of originating (janikriyā) of consciousness.
Therefore, there is not the arising of things even from activity. Thus,
it turns out that the expression "arising" (utpāda) is empty of
meaning.
§135. Here [the opponent] says: What use is this examination (vicāra)
with respect to "conditions possess activity" and so forth for us
(naḥ)? Since things such as consciousness originate in dependence on
conditions such as the visual faculty, the visual faculty and so forth
are conditions, and consciousness, etc., arise from them.582
§136. Because this too is incorrect, [Nāgārjuna] states,
[MMK 1.5]
It is alleged (kila) that these are conditions because in
dependence on them [an effect] arises.
possess activity exist or [not]?”; na, taken over from I.4c, supplies, according to
Avalokitavrata, the answer to the question: "Do [conditions] that possess activity
exist or [not? They do not.]." See Saito 1984: 224, n. 16; Ames 1994: 101 and n. 57.
582 Candrakīrti appears to have reworked Buddhapālita's introduction to MMK I.5.
Buddhapālita writes: 'dir smras pa | ci rkyen rnams bya ba dang mi ldan no zhe 'am |
bya ba dang ldan no zhes bya ba mi dgos pa bsam pa 'dis ci bya | gang gi phyir rnam
pa thams cad du rgyu la sogs pa’i rkyen bzhi po de dag la brten nas dngos po rnams
skye bas de'i phyir de dag dngos po'i rkyen yin no (BPed 16.13-16). Bhāviveka uses a
Sautrāntika objection as the lead-in to MMK I.5. In his alternative interpretation of
MMK I.4d he stated that the opponent's reason "because they possess activity" is not
established because (conventionally) it is not maintained that the conditions of a re-
sult that is not on the point of arising possess activity (PP D 56b4-5; P 68a6-7: 'di la
rkyen rnams bya ba dang ldan pa nyid du ni 'bras bu skyed [P: bskyed] pas bstan pa
yin na de yang 'bras bu skye ba la mngon du phyogs par ma gyur pa la ni mi 'dod
pas ...). In his introduction to MMK I.5 he has the Sautrāntikas argue that conditions
do possess activity right at (but not before) the time of the arising of the effect (PP D
56b5-6; P 68a7: mdo sde pa dag na re | 'bras bu skye ba'i dus kho na rkyen bya ba
dang dan pa rnams gcig la gcig phan 'dogs pas rkyen nyid du khas blangs pa'i phyir |
gtan tshigs kyi don ma [P omits ma] grub pa yang ma yin la ; cf. Ames 1994: 103).318
TRANSLATION
[But] as long as [the effect] has not arisen, how are these not
non-conditions (apratyaya)?583
If, since consciousness arises in dependence on conditions such as the
visual faculty, these are said to be the conditions of this [conscious-
ness], how indeed, as long as that effect called consciousness has not
arisen, are these, the visual faculty and so forth, not non-conditions?
The intent [of the rhetorical question of 1.5d] is "[they are] nothing
but non-conditions."584 And there is no arising from non-conditions,
[just] as [there is no arising] of oil from sand.
§137. But if [you] think that [those]-existing first as non-condi-
tions-attain the status of conditions (pratyayatva) when [they] rely
on something, [i.e.,] on another condition, [we reply that] this too is
unreasonable: also that other condition postulated as the condition for
the non-condition['s becoming a condition] becomes a condition for
this [only] when [it attains] the status of a condition. Thus exactly this
same consideration (cinta) applies to this [other condition] as well.
583 Candrakīrti cites MMK I.5: utpadyate pratītyemān itīme pratyayāḥ kila | yāvan
notpadyata ime tāvan nāpratyayāḥ katham ||. De La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 81, n. 3)
states that BP, PP and ABh read ji srid mi bskyed (“= yāvan notpādayantīme”) but
BPed and PP D and P read, like PsP Tib, ji srid mi skye; according to ABhd, the
Tibetan editions D, C, P, and N for ABh read ji srid mi bskye (obviously an error,
although Huntington has not corrected the reading; see ABhed 255.20). Saito accepts
BP D and C's grags (for kila) and rejects P and N's grag, noting that ABh and PP
attest grag (PsP Tib and MMK D and P also attest grag); see TCD s.v. grag: lo grag
zer gsum gyi grag ste mi 'dod pa dang | ma rangs pa'i tshig shugs ston pa'i phrad cig.
See Oetke 2001a: 44f. for comments on the meaning of the kārikā.
584
Whereas Candrakīrti merely paraphrases kila of MMK I.5ab with ucyante, Bhāvi-
veka clarifies that its inclusion shows that Nāgārjuna does not accept the assertion:
grag ces bya ba'i sbyor ba ni 'dir slob dpon mi bzhed par ston pa yin (PP D 56b7; P
68b1). Bhāviveka also explains the intent of the rhetorical question in 1.5d but adds
another rhetorical question as an analogous example: “As long as one is unread, how
is one not not a scholar?" (PP D 57a 1; P 68b2-3: 'di dag la rkyen nyid med do zhes
bya ba'i tshig gi don to || dper na ji srid du mi klog pa de srid du mkhas pa ma yin par
ji ltar mi 'gyur zhes bya ba bzhin).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
319
Therefore this [position of yours that things arise from conditions] is
not tenable.5
585
§138. Moreover, these, [i.e.,] the visual faculty and so forth, that are
being postulated here as the conditions of consciousness, would be
postulated with respect to either an existent (sataḥ) or inexistent
(asataḥ) [consciousness].586 But because [a condition of either type of
consciousness] is not in any way tenable, he [= Nāgārjuna] says,
[MMK I.6ab]
Neither for an inexistent nor an existent thing (artha) is a
condition tenable.587
[With MMK I.6cd] he states why:
[If the thing] is inexistent: of what is the condition? And [if it's]
existent: what use is a condition?588
585 Similar argumentation is found in BP, but only after Buddhapālita asserts that if
non-conditions later became conditions everything would end up the condition of
everything: ci ste sngar rkyen du ma gyur pa phyis rkyen du 'gyur bar sems na | de
yang mi 'thad de | ci'i phyir zhe na | thams cad kyi rkyen du thams cad thal bar 'gyur
ba'i phyir de yang mi 'dod (BPed 17.5-7); he continues: ci ste rkyen ma yin pa dag
kyang gzhan 'ga' zhig la ltos nas rkyen du 'gyur te des na thams cad kyi rkyen du
thams cad thal bar mi 'gyur bar sems na de la yang de nyid do || gang yang rung ba
la ltos nas rkyen ma yin pa yang rkyen nyid du 'gyur na rkyen nyid de la yang rkyen
|
yod par 'gyur zhing | de la yang de ltar bsam dgos so || thug pa med pa’i skyon du
yang 'gyur te | (see BPed 17.7-15). Bhāviveka concerns himself with responding to
the Sautrāntikas who claim they do not maintain that conditions are conditions prior
to the arising of the effect; he argues that conditions such as a seed grain ('bras bu)
are not conditions even when the effect originates because they are neither exactly
the same as nor different from the effect: don dam par 'bras bu (P: 'bu for 'bras bu)
la sogs pa ni myu gu skye pa'i dus na rkyen gyi ngo bo nyid ma yin te de nyid dang
gzhan nyid du brjod par bya ba ma yin pa'i phyir dper na skad cig snga ma la de dag
nyid bzhin (PP D 57a2-3; P 68b4-5).
586 It is difficult to include asya in the English translation; I compensate by placing
the referent of asya in square brackets. More literally, the sentence would read:
"Moreover, these ... would be postulated of this (asya) [consciousness maintained]
as either [something] existing or not existing."
587 Candrakīrti cites MMK 1.6ab: naivāsato naiva sataḥ pratyayo 'rthasya yujyate.320
TRANSLATION
For how could there be a condition of an inexistent thing [i.e.,] of
[something] not existing (avidyamāna)?
§139. If [the opponent argues that] there will be the designation
[condition] in consideration of the future thing, [we reply that] it is
not so, because of the fault asserted by statements such as [the
following from the Madhyamakāvatāra]:
If [you] maintain there is the designation [of sakti] in
consideration of the future [consciousness, this is wrong,] for
without sakti there is not the futurity of this [consciousness].58⁹
588 Candrakīrti cites MMK 1.6cd: asataḥ pratyayaḥ kasya sataś ca pratyayena kim ||.
PSP Tib: med na gang gi rkyen du 'gyur || yod na rkyen gyis ci zhig bya ||. Saito (1984:
226, n. 21) is of the opinion that asataḥ and sataḥ were understood as genitive abso-
lutes, but it would seem rather that they are intended as elliptical conditional clauses,
viz., asataś [cet] ….. sataś [cet]….. .
58⁹ Candrakīrti is citing MA VI.58ab: bhaviṣyatā ced vyapadeśa iṣṭaḥ śaktim vinā
nāsti hi bhāvitāsya | (cf. Li 2012: 10). The opponent in the MABh maintains that
consciousness arises from śakti. In response to Candrakīrti's statement that anyone
who maintains that there is sakti of a consciousness that has not originated would
also have to maintain it of the son of a barren woman, the opponent argues that the
sakti he maintains is not intended to be related to a non-existent consciousness, but
rather to a future consciousness (and thus, in refutation of MA VI.57cd, this future
consciousness can be considered the qualifier of its śakti; see n. 575); for in the world
one also speaks of future things, as in, "Cook the boiled rice" and "Weave the cloth"
(cf. MABhed 148.18-149.7). Candrakīrti replies that there could be the futurity of
something which will come into existence at some point, but things such as the son of
a barren woman, space, etc., which never arise, cannot be future [things]. Thus, in the
case at hand, if śakti would exist, there might be a future consciousness (for śakti
makes its existence possible). But when, inasmuch as a future consciousness does not
exist (on account of the fact that it is future), śakti does not exist (since it requires its
qualifier in order to exist as the qualified), then without sakti, consciousness, like the
son of a barren woman, etc., cannot be future. Cf. MABhed 149.11-18: res 'ga' gang
zhig tu 'gyur na ni de 'byung bar 'gyur gyi | rtag tu 'byung ba ma yin par nges pa mo
gsham gyi bu la sogs pa'am nam mkha’ la sogs pa ni mi 'gyur ro || de’i phyir ’dir gal
te nus pa yod par 'gyur na ni | rnam par shes pa 'byung bar 'gyur ba nyid du 'gyur ba
zhig na gang gi tshe rnam par shes pa ma 'ongs pa yod pa ma yin pa nyid kyis nus pa
med pa nyid yin pa de'i tshe | mo gsham gyi bu la sogs pa rnams (MABHUN: without
rnams) bzhin du nus pa med par de'i 'byung bar 'gyur ba nyid yod pa ma yin no ||.
Candrakīrti adds that the example of boiled rice is also explained accordingly.
An objection not dissimilar to that here in the PsP, in which it is said that because
cloth comes into being from threads, it is appropriate to teach threads as thePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
321
§140. Also for something existent, [that is,] for something existing
(vidyamāna), whose origination has [already] resulted (labdhajanma),
the postulation of a condition is absolutely useless (nisphala).
§141. It having been brought out in this way that the collective
(samasta) conditions, through [their] lack of capability to produce an
effect, are not conditions, it is subsequently explained that the
individual (vyasta) [conditions] are not conditions.
§142. At this point [the opponent] says: Even if conditions are thus
impossible, there certainly is, nonetheless, the general establishment
of [the individual] conditions, because their [defining] characteristics
(lakṣaṇa) are taught. Among them, the [defining] characteristic
[disclosed by the formulation] "the cause is that which brings forth”
(nirvartako hetuḥ) has been stated for the cause condition (hetu-
pratyaya). And teaching a [defining] characteristic for something that
does not exist does not make sense, just as [teaching the defining
characteristic] of the son of a barren woman [would not].5
590
conditions of cloth by reason of [the latter's] later origination, appears in BP: smras
pargyu spun dag las snam bu 'byung bas phyis 'byung ba'i tshul gyis rgyu spun dag
snam bu’i rkyen yin par bstan du rung (BPed 18.7-8). Buddhapālita retorts that a
condition cannot be established in reliance on something that arises later, i.e., some-
thing not arisen (see BPed 18.9-17). A similar objection turns up again in PP, where
the opponent argues that he does not maintain the arising of the non-existent (such as
a sky-flower), but rather maintains the arising of that which possesses arising (*utpa-
ttimat). Bhāviveka responds that even in the case of a pot, cloth and hut, etc., which
have the characteristic of non-existence prior to arising, the alleged conditions will
not be of anything, since the pot, cloth, etc., are non-existent prior to arising (see PP
D 57b2-4; P 69a5-8; see also PPȚ D 183b7-185a3). Bhāviveka additionally reinter-
prets MMK I.6a's naivāsato naiva sataḥ as referring to a thing neither existent nor
inexistent (thus: “For a neither-existent-nor-inexistent thing a condition is not ten-
able") in order to refute Sautrāntikas who accept that conditions are not tenable either
for something existent or for something inexistent, but argue that conditions attain
the status of conditions right when the effect is in the process of arising, that is, when
it cannot be defined as either non-existent or existent (see PP D 57b7-58a4; P 69b3-8
and Ames 1994: 107).
590
A similar argument introduces MMK I.7 in BP (BPed 19.9-11: 'dir smras pa 'di la
dngos po rnams ni mtshan nyid las 'grub la | rgyu ni sgrub par byed pa'o || zhes rgyu'i
mtshan nyid kyang bstan pas de ltar mtshan nyid yod pa'i rgyu yod do). Bhāviveka
introduces his alternative interpretation of the kārikā with a fellow Buddhist's objec-322
§143. Reply: There might be a cause condition if its [defining]
characteristic existed. But it does not exist, because,
TRANSLATION
[MMK 1.7]
When neither an existent (sat), nor an inexistent (asat), nor a
[both] existent and inexistent (sadasat) factor (dharma) comes
forth (nirvartate),
How is the cause [condition] (hetu) that which brings forth
(nirvartaka)?5⁹¹ Such being the case, [a cause condition] is not
reasonable.592
tion in the form of a five-part inference arguing for the existence of the four condi-
tions because they have been taught by the Tathāgata (see PP D 58b3-5; P 70a7-
70b3; see also n. 236). The Tathāgata, the opponent Buddhist states, taught the cause
[condition] to be that which brings forth (rgyu ni sgrub par byed pa'o).
5⁹1 PSP Tib presents ji ltar sgrub byed rgyu zhes bya for katham nirvartako hetuḥ, i.e.,
"How is there an effectuator called 'cause'?” Saito (see BP 19) does not translate
zhes bya. Ames (1994: 108), relying on Bhāviveka's commentary, translates MMK
1.7c as "How is the cause that which brings about?""
592 MMK I.7, according to de La Vallée Poussin (both at PsP₁ 83.7-8 and at PsP₁ 31.6
and 8) and all the manuscripts (here and at their equivalent for PsP₁ 31.6 and 8),
reads: na san nāsan na sadasan dharmo nirvartate yadā | katham nirvartako hetur
evam sati hi yujyate ||. PsP Tib, however, presents: gang tshe chos ni yod pa dang ||
med dang yod med ni 'grub pa || ji ltar sgrub byed rgyu zhes bya || de Ita yin na mi rigs
so ||. De La Vallée Poussin notes that PsP Tib would reflect katham nirvartako hetur
ity evam sati na yujyate (PsP₁ 83, n. 2; the iti of de La Vallée Poussin's reconstruc-
tion unmetrically adds a mātrā to the pāda). ABh, BP, PP, PPT and MMK, also
present the final quarter as de lta (BP: Itar) yin na mi rigs so (Huntington [1986: 39]
reports that CL corresponds with ABh). All five of these texts were translated by
Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan (some of the verses in MMK, were later revised
by Pa tshab). Before concluding that the individual Sanskrit manuscripts relied on for
the five translations must have each read evam sati na yujyate for MMK I.7d, it is
important to recall that Saito has determined, through a comparison of the kārikās in
ABh, BP and PP with the respective commentators' interpretations of them, that
Jñanagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan first translated the PPT, which contains the PP
and the MMK, and then extracted the MMK (translated in reliance on the PP and
PPȚ’s interpretation of it) and inserted it into their translations of BP, ABh and PP
([Saito 1984: xvii:] “... Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan always gave the same
translation of MK embedded in ABh, BP, PP, and PPT even though these commen-
taries obviously differ in their interpretation of the kārikās"; see also Saito 1995). We
may nevertheless assume that the Sanskrit manuscripts of the PPT and PP relied
upon by Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan presented MMK 1.7d as evam sati na
yujyate. We may also assume that one, possibly both, of the PsP manuscripts usedPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
323
approximately 250 years later for the PsP translation read evam sati na yujyate, be-
cause PSP Tib for MMK I.7d reads de lta yin na mi rigs so. Even though Mahāsumati
and Pa tshab elected to insert Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan's earlier MMK
translation into their PsP translation instead of translating the MMK embedded in the
PSP of their Sanskrit manuscript-they did carefully check the inserted MMK trans-
lation against the PsP's MMK, and made any emendations or revisions deemed
necessary, including occasional changes to bring it into accord with Candrakīrti's
commentarial interpretation of it (for two instances in which they did not make the
necessary changes, see Saito 1995).
The stand-alone version of MMK in the Tanjur was, as Saito has noted, originally
the version made by Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan in reliance on the PP and
PPT. According to the MMK, Derge colophon, this MMK, translation underwent
two later revisions: the first was made in Kashmir by the translator team Mahāsumati
and Pa tshab in reliance on the MMK embedded in the PsP, the second in Lhasa by
Kanakavarman and Pa tshab in reliance on the MMK embedded in a second PsP
Sanskrit manuscript. Mahāsumati and Pa tshab applied the revisions they had made
to the MMK they had "pasted" into their PsP translation to the stand-alone MMKT.
Kanakavarman and Pa tshab's MMK, revisions would similarly have reflected the
revisions if any—they made to the MMK contained in the PsP translation when
they checked this translation against the second PsP manuscript. It is possible-
though evidence is lacking—that they also checked the MMK, translation in reliance
on a stand-alone manuscript of the MMK available in Lhasa (that the MMK
circulated in India as stand-alone work has been confirmed by Luo Zhao and
Shaoyong Ye's discovery of two MMK Sanskrit manuscripts; see Ye 2009: 309f.).
The translator teams responsible for, respectively, the translation and revisions of
MMKT accepted each time the translation de lta yin na mi rigs so for MMK I.7d.
For the sake of further ascertaining the correct reading for MMK I.7d, it may prove
worthwhile to examine the Indian commentators' reactions to MMK 1.7cd. 1) The
author of the ABh, known for his restatement of the kārikās in his commentary,
glosses 1.7cd thus: de'i tshe ji ltar sgrub par byed pa rgyu zhes bya ste | de Ita yin na
mi rigs so (ABhed 257.8-10). Given that this is little more than the Tibetan version of
the kārikā in prose form, it seems fairly certain that na, and not hi, stood in the ABh’s
Sanskrit citation of MMK I.7d and in the MMK manuscript relied on by the author of
the ABh. 2) Buddhapālita comments on 1.7cd with the words: de ltar yin na sgrub par
byed pa rgyu zhes bya ba de mi rigs so (BPed 20.14). It is true that this comment could
equally apply to the rhetorical question with hi, but it may well be intended as the
explanation of 1.7cd attesting evam sati na yujyate, and mi rigs so may be a citation.
3) Bhāviveka presents MMK I.7ab, then adds his own words de yi tshe na don dam
par, and immediately afterward cites I.7c (I.7c: ji ltar sgrub byed rgyu zhes bya). His
commentary on 1.7c reads: de ni sgrub par byed pa ma yin pa kho na "That [alleged
cause condition] is certainly not that which brings forth (nirvartako)" (PP D 58b1; P
70a5). It is thus clear that he considered MMK 1.7c and 1.7d to be two independent
statements, with only MMK I.7c presenting the rhetorical question; MMK 1.7d would
simply sum up the situation with evam sati na yujyate. He subsequently presents the324
TRANSLATION
As regards the [kārikā], that which brings forth (nirvartaka) [is] the
producer (utpadaka). If a factor (dharma), [that is,] the [thing] to be
brought forth, came forth, the producing cause would produce it. But
objection of Buddhists who claim the Tathāgata taught the cause condition and again
cites 1.7ab, followed by 1.7cd. His comment on 1.7cd is: de ni sgrub par byed pa’i
rgyu ma yin pa kho na'o zhes bya ba’i tshig gi don "The meaning of the words is that
it is certainly not a cause that brings forth" (PP D 58b7; P 70b5-6). 4) Avalokitavrata
quotes MMK I.7cd from the PP and Bhāviveka's above-cited comment on it,
referring to 1.7cd as follows: de’i tshe ji ltar rgyu’i (D: rgyu) rkyen ces bya ste | de
lta yin na don dam par rgyu'i rkyen mi rigs so zhes bya'i tha tshig go (*tadā katham
hetupratyaya ity evam sati paramārthato hetupratyayo na yujyate ...) “... then, how is
there a cause condition? It being thus, ultimately a cause condition is not [logically]
possible” (PPȚ D 192b5; P 225a4-5); Avalokitavrata seems quite definitely to have
read 1.7c and d as two independent sentences. 5) Candrakīrti's comment on MMK
1.7cd as cited in PsPM §50 (PSP₁ 31.8) is limited to: naivāsau nirvartako hetu iti
vākyārthaḥ, a statement that could be related to 1.7cd construed with either na or hi.
On the other hand, the final words of his commentary on MMK I.7 are precisely
evam sati na yujyate, which we might presume to be a citation of I.7d.
Thus, to conclude: the MMK manuscript used by the author of the Akutobhayā as
well as the MMK manuscript used by Bhāviveka attested MMK I.7d as evam sati na
yujyate; Avalokitavrata's manuscript of Bhāviveka's PP attested MMK I.7d as evam
sati na yujyate; the PPȚ manuscript and the PP manuscript used by the translator
team Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan attested evam sati na yujyate; one or both
of the PsP manuscripts used by the PsP translator teams Mahāsumati and Pa tshab
and Kanakarvarman and Pa tshab likewise attested evam sati na yujyate. It seems
possible that the MMK manuscript used by Buddhapālita also attested MMK I.7d as
evam sati na yujyate, and that the one used by Candrakīrti read evam sati na yujyate,
because he closes his commentary on MMK I.7 with exactly these words. I thus
consider it justifiable, on the basis of MMK 1.7c and d as cited, glossed and para-
phrased by the Indian commentarial tradition, and on the basis of the Tibetan trans-
lation de lta yin na mi rigs so accepted by all three translator teams, to emend to evam
sati na yujyate.
It must, however, be acknowledged that the reading evam sati hi yujyate, attested by
both P and Q, was the accepted reading for the present study's manuscript tradition
already by the twelfth century. According to our manuscripts, MMK 1.7cd (katham
nirvartako hetur evam sati hi yujyate) would have been read as a single sentence,
with katham construed with hi, in the sense “[Then] obviously (hi) how, this being
the case, could a cause that brings forth be [logically] possible?" (the construction
katham hi would be similar to Pāli katham hi nāma used to introduce a rhetorical
question expressing wonder or amazement: "How could it be that ...?! [cf. PTSD and
CPD s.v. katham]). In Kumārajīva’s translation (T 30.1564: 3a3) the rendering of
MMK 1.7cd is made with one pāda (d): “How then can one say that there are [for it,
the effect,] conditions?" See also Bocking 1995: 133. Compare Oetke's (2001a: 46)
attempt to find meaning for hi.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
325
[a factor] does not come forth, because [a thing] to be brought forth
which has the form of [either] an existent, an inexistent, or an existent
and inexistent [factor] does not exist. Among these [three alterna-
tives], an existent [factor] does not come forth because [it already]
exists. Nor does an inexistent [factor come forth], because [it] does
not exist. Nor does an existent and inexistent [factor come forth],
because a mutually contradictory single thing does not exist, and
because there would be the faults stated for both alternatives. Because
in this way there is no arising of an effect, there is thus no cause
condition either. And therefore, it being thus, that which has been
asserted [by the opponent], [namely, that] the cause condition exists
because [its defining] characteristic exists, is not tenable.593
§144. Now, for the sake of the refutation of the object condition
(arambaṇapratyaya), he [= Nāgārjuna] states,
[MMK I.8]
This existent (sat) factor, indeed without an object [condition]
(anārambaṇa), is taught 5⁹4 [by you as having an object condi-
tion];
593 Devasarman's commentary on MMK I.7 has been preserved in Bhāviveka's PP
(Avalokitavrata informs that his commentary was entitled dkar po 'char ba; Ames
[1994: 129, n. 105] suggests *Śuklābhyudaya as the Sanskrit title). Devaśarman
claims that the Mādhyamika has two objects of refutation, namely, attachment to
objects of expression (*abhidheya) and attachment to expressions (*abhidhāna).
Attachment to objects of expression has already been refuted via the refutation of
arising, and thus Nāgārjuna aims to refute attachment to expressions by way of
MMK I.7. He does this by demonstrating that it is impossible for something to come
forth. Effects thus being impossible, a reason (byed rgyu; *kāraṇa) for the expression
“cause” does not exist (rgyur brjod pa la ’jug pa’i byed rgyu med pa’i phyir) (see PP
D 59a1-4; P 70b6-71a2; Ames 1994: 110). Bhāviveka also briefly summarizes and
attacks, according to Avalokitavrata (Bhāviveka refers to the opponent[s] only as
gzhan dag), Buddhapālita's commentary on MMK I.7. Avalokitavrata explains
Bhāviveka's somewhat laconic critique (PP D 59a5; P 71a4: de ni bzang po ma yin te
lan btab zin pa'i phyir) as referring to the fact that Buddhapālita attempts to refute
the coming forth of something existent, something inexistent and something both
existent and inexistent by utilizing only theses; in each case he fails to present
reasons and examples (see PPȚ D 195a1-195b1; P 227a1-227b2).
5⁹4 Candrakīrti and Buddhapālita understand the subject of the verb upadiśyate to be
the opponent (see BPed 20.20-24). The author of ABh understands its subject to be326
TRANSLATION
When a[n existent] factor is without an object [condition], how is
there nevertheless an object [condition]?5⁹5
the Bhagavat, who has stated in the Prajñāpāramitā that the 84,000 dharmaskandhas
are of one savour, indeed without an object support (... ro gcig dmigs pa med pa kho
na yin; cf. ABhed 257.20-22). Bhāviveka likewise understands its subject to be the
Bhagavat; see Saito 1984: 227, n. 28. Bhāviveka provides scriptural support for
MMK 1.8 with quotations from the Suvikrāntavikrāmiparipṛcchā (see PP D 59b7-
60a3; P 71b8-72a4; Ames 1994: 113).
595 Candrakīrti cites MMK I.8: anārambaṇa evāyam san dharma upadiśyate |
athānārambaṇe dharme kuta ārambaṇam punaḥ ||. Saito and Huntington note that
MMK I.8 and 1.9 are reversed in CL (cf. Saito 1984: 228, n. 31; Huntington 1986: 39
[the corresponding kārikās are numbered 10 and 11 in the latter's edition of ABh]);
see also Bocking 1995: 114f. Saito points out that the CL presents the four kārikās
refuting the individual four conditions (= MMK I.6-9) in the order the conditions are
presented in AK II.61cd and 62, and not in the order they appear in MMK I.2, and
suggests that Kumārajīva may have relied on the AK order and therefore be
responsible for the switch. ABh, BP, PP and PPT present de ltar for I.8c's atha. PsP
Tib attests ci ste, and MMK, has been corrected by Pa tshab to read ci ste. Ames
(1994: 131, n. 119) suggests that Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan, the translators
of the MMK (the version used and lightly revised by Pa tshab), read tathā. As Saito
has pointed out, their MMK translation was influenced by the readings in their PP
and PPT manuscripts. Given that Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan merely in-
serted their PP and PPT-influenced translation of the MMK into BP, it is not sur-
prising that we also find de ltar in the BP kārikā; what is disconcerting, however, is
the fact that Buddhapālita, like Candrakīrti, explains the word as indicating a ques-
tion (de ltar zhes bya ba’'i sgra ni dri ba’o), an explanation more reasonably
connected with atha (cf. Apte s.v. atha meaning 5: praśna). One thus conjectures that
Buddhapālita read atha. The fact that de ltar also appears in Buddhapālita's commen-
tarial gloss on the kārikā word would seem to indicate that either the BP manuscript
used by Jñanagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan attested the corrupt reading tathā or that
the translators noted that Buddhapalita was citing from the kārikā and therefore con-
sciously translated the commentary's atha to accord with their translation of the
kārikā's atha (there are two other instances of de ltar in BP which occur in combina-
tion with the other words of I.8c [see BPed 21.13; 21.24]). Bhāviveka does not gloss
the word in his PP.
De La Vallée Poussin notes that san is not translated in MMK 1.8 in ABh (PsP₁ 84, n.
2) but he has mistaken the beginning of 1.8c (de ltar chos ’di) for the beginning of
1.8a (yod pa'i chos 'di). The kārikā in ABh, however, like that of PsP but unlike that
of PP and BP which read yin pa'i chos 'di, does read yod pa'i chos 'di ... (see Saito's
[1984: 227, n. 28] comments on the translation of I.8ab). De La Vallée Poussin
further notes that ayam is not translated in BP; the reading yin pa’i chos ni as found
in D, C, P and N has been corrected by Saito to yin pa'i chos 'di on the basis of the
commentary (see BPed 20, n. 9).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
327
In this system [of the opponent] owing to authoritative testimony
(agama) [which states:] "Which factors have an object [support]?
[answer:] All the consciousnesses and mental factors (citta-
caitta)"596
[it is held that] an object [support] such as visual form, by
virtue of which the consciousnesses and mental factors, as appro-
priate (yathayogam), arise, is their object condition (ārambaṇa-
pratyaya).5⁹7 And this [object condition] would be postulated [by you
either] for [consciousnesses and mental factors] that exist or for non-
existing [consciousnesses and mental factors]. Among these [two
alternatives, as regards the first, i.e., already] existing [conscious-
nesses and mental factors], there would be no use for their object
[condition]; for an object [condition] would be postulated for the sake
of the arising of a factor (dharma), but that [existent factor] already
exists prior to the object [condition]. Now when in this way a factor is
established by its own nature (svātman) without an object [condition],
what is the point in postulating its association (yoga) with an object
[condition]? Thus, this existent, [that is,] existing, factor such as
consciousness is indeed without an object [condition]. You alone,
based on [your] own fancy (svamanīṣikā), say that it has an object
[condition] (sārambana).598 It does not, however, have any connection
with an object [condition].
§145. But if [on the other hand,] it is postulated that a non-existent
[factor] has an object [condition], that [idea] is not reasonable either,
[because Nāgārjuna states:] “[T]his ... indeed without an object,” etc.
(anārambaṇa evāyam ityādi); for there is no association of a non-
5⁹6 The citation is from the Prakaraṇa (T Vol. 26, 715c26), a canonical Abhidharma
work of the Sarvāstivāda school traditionally said to have been authored by Vasu-
mitra. It is more likely a compilation. The Prakaraṇa passage cited by Candrakīrti is
also cited by Bhāviveka: dmigs pa dang bcas pa’i chos rnams gang zhe na | ’di lta
ste | sems dang sems las byung ba rnams so (P: ||) zhes (PP D 59b5; P 71b5-6). On the
Prakaraṇa see, e.g., Frauwallner 1995: 32ff.; Willemen et al. 1998: 212ff. Cf. also
AK II.34bc: cittacaitasāḥ sāśrayālambanākārāḥ.
597 The object condition is explicitly associated with cittacaitta here; see n. 555.
598
Cp. BPed 20.22-23: ... khyod kyis rang gi blos dmigs pa dang bcas pa zhes brjod.328
TRANSLATION
existing [factor] with an object [condition].5⁹⁹ [The alternative reading
of MMK I.8ab is thus:]
599
599 Candrakīrti views MMK 1.8ab as amenable to two interpretations. In the first
interpretation, sat is taken as an attributive adjective of dharma; the statement com-
posed of the first five words of the verse-half is thus connected with the first of the
two alternatives presented in Candrakīrti's commentary, viz., that existing conscious-
nesses and mental factors have an object condition (the first alternative: ayam ca
vidyamānānāṁ vā parikalpyeta ...). This interpretation may be clarified as: anāra-
mbaṇa evāyam san (= vidyamāno) dharmaḥ ... . In the second interpretation, sat of
the kārikā is understood as marking the predicative function of anārambaṇa; the first
five words of the kārikā are thus connected with Candrakīrti's second alternative,
viz., that non-existing consciousnesses and mental factors have an object condition
(the second alternative: ayam ca ... parikalpyetāvidyamānānām vā). This interpreta-
tion may be clarified as: anārambaṇa eva sann ayam [avidyamāno] dharmo
Candrakīrti refers to this second interpretation with anārambaṇa evāyam ityādi. PsP
Tib presents a full and revised translation of 1.8ab at this point, with the revisions
reflecting the second interpretation: chos 'di dmigs pa med pa ni || yin pa kho nar nye
bar bstan || (yin pa renders san in its function as a predicate-marker). See also the
comments in Saito 1984: 227, n. 28.
This second interpretation of the kārikā as found in the PsP corresponds with
Buddhapalita's interpretation of MMK I.8. Buddhapālita thus interprets I.8ab to
mean “This [inexistent] factor which is indeed without an object [condition], ... .”
Buddhapālita's comments on the kārikā in this meaning are more elaborate than
Candrakīrti's. He argues that an existent dharma could have an object [condition],
but a non-existing dharma, i.e., one that has not yet come into existence, could not.
Since prior to having an object [condition] a dharma is without an object condition, it
is therefore without an object condition. It is the same as a person and wealth: only a
person who exists can be a possessor of wealth: chos yod pa ni dmigs pa dang bcas
par 'gyur gyi med pa ni mi 'gyur ro || dmigs pa dang bcas pa'i sngon rol na dmigs pa
med
pas de ni dmigs pa med pa yin no || 'di Ita ste | dper na nor yod pa ni nor dang
bcas pa ste nor can zhes bya'o || 'ga' zhig yod na nor dang bcas par 'gyur gyi | med
na mi 'gyur ro || nor dang bcas pa'i sngon rol na nor med pas de ni nor med pa yin pa
bzhin no (BPed 21.2-6). Saito states that Bhāviveka appears to criticize this example
of a person and wealth when he clarifies that a consciousness is said to have an object
[condition] because it arises having the appearance of the object [condition] by virtue
of which it arises, and not because there is a simultaneous connection, as in the case
of someone having wealth (see Saito 1984: 228, n. 30); Bhāviveka states: dmigs pa
gang gis skye ba na | (D: ||) der snang ba skye ba’i phyir dmigs pa dang bcas pa zhes
bya'i | nor can bzhin du dus gcig kho nar 'brel pa’i (P: ba’i) phyir ni ma yin (PP D
59b1-2; P 71a8-71b1). While it is possible that Bhāviveka's critique of the example
is meant as an indirect criticism of BP, it should also be remarked that Buddhapālita
uses the example in the context of refuting the ārambaṇapratyaya, whereas Bhāvive-
ka critiques it in the context of explaining the ārambaṇapratyaya on the surface
level; Bhāviveka may have thus merely been inspired by Buddhapālita's commentaryPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
329
This [inexistent] factor, which is (sat) indeed without an object
[condition], is taught
The [unexpressed] rest of the sentence is: "by you as having an object
[condition]."600
to refer to the example. Buddhapālita subsequently presents an opponent who cri-
tiques the example of wealth as inappropriate for the illustration of sārambaṇa. The
corrected view of sārambaṇa set forth by the opponent, according to Buddhapālita, is
answered by the last two quarters of MMK I.8 (see BPed 21.15-19; 21.23-22.5; BP tr
21).
Bhāviveka understands I.8ab (translated in PP Tib as yin pa'i chos 'di dmigs pa ni ||
med pa kho nar nye bar bstan ||) to be referring to statements of the Buddha's in
which he has taught (upadiśyate) or alluded to the fact that past and future dharmas,
as well as dharmas in the process of arising, do not have an object condition. Bhāvi-
veka states that the reason consciousnesses and mental factors do not have an object
[condition] is that their arising on the ultimate level has been negated. Only for the
sake of setting forth the superficial level of truth is cognition said to have an object
condition. According to Avalokitavrata, since all things are momentary and because
the object has already ceased when cognition of it occurs, i.e., when consciousness
appears in its (i.e., the object's) aspect (ākāra), even on the surface level conscious-
nesses and mental factors do not have a concurrent object condition. Bhāviveka
glosses sat of MMK I.8ab with a Sanskrit word that has been translated into Tibetan
as gyur pa: yin pa’i zhes bya ba ni gyur pa'i zhes bya ba'i tha tshig (PP D 59a6; P
71a5). Ames (1994: 111) suggests that gyur pa reflects bhūta and translates this gloss
as "is' (yin pa = san) has the meaning of being [such-and-such]." It is possible that
PP Skt attested instead bhavan, which is attested in our ms Q as a gloss for sat
(bhavan appears to be an interpolation in Q). Avalokitavrata considers Bhāviveka to
understand sat as a predicate-marker that is to be construed with a compound not
expressed in the kārikā; he informs that what has not been stated is *anārambaṇa.
He, like Bhāviveka, interprets the verse to mean "This factor (dharma) which is
[without an object condition (anārambaṇa)] is taught [by the Buddha] to be indeed
ultimately (paramārthata) without an object [condition] (anārambaṇa)." He com-
ments on the verse-half as follows: de la yin pa'i chos 'di zhes bya ba ni khyad par
gyi gzhi yin la | dmigs pa ni | (P: without |) med pa kho nar nye bar bstan | (P: without
|) zhes (P: ces) bya ba ni de’i khyad par yin te | dmigs pa med pa yin pa'i chos mig gi
rnam par shes pa la sogs pa blo la bzhag pa 'di ni don dam par dmigs pa med pa kho
nar bcom ldan 'das kyis (P: kyi) nye bar bstan to zhes bya bar sbyar ro || yin pa'i zhes
bya ba ni gyur pa’i gzhi zhes bya ba’i tha tshig go zhes bya ba ni | dmigs pa med pa
yin pa'i zhes bya ba ni dmigs pa med par gyur pa'i zhes (P: ces) bya ba'i tha tshig
(PPT D 195b4-6; P 227b6-8).
600 PSP Tib reads chos 'di dmigs pa med pa ni || yin pa ste gyur pa kho na khyed kyis
nye bar bstan te | dmigs pa dang bcas par zhes bya ba ni tshig gi lhag ma’o for
anārambaṇa evāyam san dharma upadiśyate, bhavadbhiḥ sārambaṇa iti vākyaśeṣaḥ.330
TRANSLATION
When a[n inexistent] factor is without an object [condition], how
is there nevertheless an object [condition]?
The word atha is [employed] in [the sense of indicating] a question;601
kuta ("how") [is employed] in [the sense of indicating] a reason
(hetu). Therefore, this is the sense: Thus, when a factor that is
inexistent (asat) [i.e.], is not existing (avidyamāna), is without an
object [condition] (anārambaṇa), how can there still (bhūyas) [be] an
object [condition]? The intent is: Since something that has an object
[condition] does not exist, an object [condition] also does not exist.602
§146. [Question:] Why then [is it asserted that] consciousnesses and
mental factors have an object [condition] (sārambaṇāś cittacaittāḥ)?
PSP Tib appears to have been influenced by the interpolated reading bhavan in a
manuscript at the translators' disposal which was connected with ms Q's tradition:
ms Q reads at this point anārambaṇa evāyam san bhavan dharma upadiśyate .... De
La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 85, n. 1) reconstructs PSP Tib's Sanskrit as dharmo 'yam
anālambanaḥ san bhūta eva bhavadbhir upadiśyate; sālambana iti vākyaśeṣaḥ; it is
more likely that Pa tshab and his collaborators' manuscripts read—with the addition
of Q's bhavan-as our edition does. Note that Pa tshab revises MMK I.8ab to read
chos 'di dmigs pa med pa ni || yin pa kho nar nye bar bstan || (from yod pa’i chos 'di
dmigs pa ni || med pa kho na nye bar bstan ||) for the sake of conveying the meaning
of the second interpretation.
601 Candrakīrti relies on Buddhapālita's commentary for this explanation (BPed 21.12-
13: de Itar zhes bya ba sgra ni dri ba'o || ga la 'gyur zhes bya ba gtan tshigs bstan
pa). atha in its sense of indicating a question, here in combination with the interroga-
tive particle kuta, cannot be translated into English.
602 Buddhapalita cites MMK I.8cd twice, constructing his commentary such that the
second instance of citation is presented as the response to an opponent who rejects
the simultaneous relationship of a dharma and its object condition (exemplified in his
commentary on MMK I.8ab by a person and wealth, the first citation of 1.8cd
representing the logical conclusion to I.8ab's commentary) and instead argues that
the object condition is the basis (gzhi; Saito suggests *nidāna [BP 21]) that produces
a dharma. In his comments on the second citation of 1.8cd, Buddhapālita responds
that when a dharma does not exist, i.e., has not come into being (mngon par ma
grub), then what is termed “the dharma's object [condition]” has also not come into
being; and thus, given that the object condition does not exist, it does not produce the
dharma (see BPed 21.23-22.5).
trPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
331
[Answer:] This is a surface-level characteristic, not an ultimate [one];
therefore, there is not a fault.603
$147. Now, for the sake of refuting the immediately preceding
condition (samanantarapratyaya), he [= Nāgārjuna] says:
[MMK 1.9]
When factors (dharma) have not [yet] arisen, cessation (nirodha)
[of the cause] is not possible,
Thus, the immediately preceding [condition] (anantara) is not
[logically] possible. And when [the cause] has ceased, what is the
condition?604
There [in MMK 1.9], the quarters in the last half of the verse should
be regarded as [being in] an inverted order, and the word "and" (ca)
as being in the wrong place [that is, instead of niruddhe pratyayaś ca
kaḥ one should understand] niruddhe ca [pratyayaḥ kaḥ]. Therefore,
the reading [should be] thus: "And when [the cause] has ceased, what
is the condition? Thus, the immediately preceding [condition] is not
[logically] possible." For the sake of verse composition, however, it
has been put like this.605
As concerns the [content], the immediately preceding (anantara)
cessation (nirodha) of the cause (kāraṇa) that is the condition for the
arising of the effect is the [defining] characteristic of the immediately
603 Both Bhāviveka and Candrakīrti affirm that consciousnesses and mental factors
have an object condition on the surface level. Bhāviveka states: dmigs pa dang bcas
pa zhes bya ba ni tha snyad kyi bden pa'i lugs rnam par gzhag pa'i phyir (PP D 59al;
P 71a8).
604 Candrakīrti cites MMK 1.9: anutpanneṣu dharmeșu nirodho nopapadyate | nāna-
ntaram ato yuktam niruddhe pratyayaś ca kaḥ ||.
605 Candrakīrti follows Buddhapālita in considering the last two quarters of the kārikā
as requiring reversal for proper comprehension of Nāgārjuna's intent. The Tibetan
for the second verse-half reads: de phyir de ma thag mi rigs || 'gags na rkyen yang
gang zhig yin || (Pa tshab does not emend Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtsan's trans-
lation). Buddhapālita writes (cf. BPed 22.13-16): de la rtsa ba ’og ma gnyis || ’gags na
rkyen yang gang zhig yin || de phyir de ma thag mi rigs || zhes bsnor bar blta bar
bya'o ||. The author of ABh and Bhāviveka interpret the kārikā as it stands.TRANSLATION
preceding condition (samanantarapratyaya).606 Here [the karikā]
takes into account the fact that when factors, [i.e.,] effects (kārya),
[namely,] a sprout and so forth, have not [yet] arisen, the cessation of
the cause (kāraṇa), [i.e.,] a seed and so forth, does not make sense.607
When this is the case, then since there is no cessation of a cause, what
is the immediately preceding condition for the sprout? But if [you]
maintain that even if the effect has not arisen, the seed ceases, [then]
in this case, when the seed has ceased, [i.e.,] has become non-
existent, what is the condition for the sprout? Or what is the condition
for the cessation of the seed? Since both of these [i.e., the cessation of
the seed and the sprout,] will be without a cause (ahetuka), he [=
Nāgārjuna] states, "And when [the cause] has ceased, what is the
condition?"608 The word "and" (ca) [of 1.9d] takes reference to the
332
606 Candrakīrti refers to the defining characteristic of the immediately preceding
condition as formulated in his commentary on MMK I.2; see n. 556.
607 Candrakirti understands dharmas of MMK 1.9a to refer to effects; Buddhapālita
also understands the reference to be to effects. Bhāviveka, on the other hand, is of the
opinion that with the mention of dharmas in MMK 1.9a, Nāgārjuna intends reference
to all things, and specifically to causes. Bhāviveka explains that when all dharmas
are in ultimate reality unarisen, their cessation is not possible, just as the cessation of
an unarisen second head is not possible: 'di la don dam par chos thams cad rnam pa
thams cad du bkag pa'i phyir chos rnams ma skyes so (P: ||) zhes de bstan zin pas de'i
phyir... (MMK I.9ab) ... ma skyes pa'i phyir mgo gnyis pa dgag pa bzhin (PP D 60a4;
P 72a4-6). Both Candrakīrti and Buddhapālita present this interpretation as a
secondary, alternative approach to the kārikā; see BPed 24.5-18, BP tr 24.
608 Candrakīrti initially argues that an effect would need to exist for the cessation of
its cause to make any sense, because otherwise the effect would not have a cause.
Since the cessation of the cause should not occur when the effect is still not there,
cessation as the immediately preceding condition is not possible. He then moves on
to reject the idea that cessation of the cause could occur even if the effect has not yet
arisen, arguing that if the cause, i.e., seed, no longer exists, the effect, the sprout, in
not having a cause (ahetuka), could not arise. He adds that if one holds that the effect
has not arisen before the seed ceases, the perishing of the cause (kāraṇa), e.g., a seed,
would be without a cause (ahetuka), that is, there would be no cause for its perishing.
Candrakīrti has appropriated the argumentation from the corresponding section of
Buddhapalita's commentary on the kārikā. Cp. BPed 23.4-10: de la gal te myu gu skye
ba’i sngon rol du sa bon 'gags par 'gyur na ni sa bon 'gags te med na myu gu skye
bar 'gyur ba gang yin pa de'i rkyen yang gang zhig yin yang na sa bon 'gag pa'i
rkyen yang gang zhig yin | sa bon 'gags te med pa yang ji ltar myu gu skye ba’i rkyen
du 'gyur | myu gu ma skyes pa'i rkyen du sa bon 'gag pa ji ltar 'gyur | de lta bas na saPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
333
bon 'gags nas myu gu skye bar rtog na de gnyi ga rgyu med par thal bar 'gyur te |
rgyu med par ni mi 'dod. “As regards that, if prior to the arising of the sprout the seed
has ceased, what, when the seed has ceased, i.e., is non-existent, is the condition for
the arising of the sprout? Or what is the condition the cessation of the seed? How
could the seed, having ceased, [and] although [now] non-existent, be the condition
for the arising of the sprout? How could the cessation of the seed be the condition for
the sprout which has not [yet] arisen? Thus, if it is imagined that the sprout arises
once the seed ceases, it follows that those both [i.e., cessation and arising] are with-
out a cause (*ahetuka). [But] being without a cause is not maintained [by you the
opponent]." In the objection that follows in BP the opponent argues that the seed
ceases immediately after the sprout has arisen and therefore the arisen sprout is the
condition for the perishing of the seed; Buddhapālita states that even in this case both
would be, as in the earlier case, without a cause [*ahetuka] (see BPed 23.11-13 and
Buddhapālita’s response at 23.14-18). Bhāviveka presents 1.9d as rejecting the Con-
servative Buddhists' theory that the cessation of consciousness and mental factors
represents the immediately preceding condition; he argues by way of an inference
that this cessation of consciousness and mental factors is just like a cessation of con-
sciousness and mental factors that occurred long ago or like matter (according to
Avalokitavrata: cessations of matter), neither of which can serve as the immediately
preceding condition for a consciousness that is about to arise (see PP D 60a5-7; P
72a6-8; Kajiyama 1964: 120; Ames 1994: 114). Here and in the rest of his commen-
tary on the kārikā, Bhāviveka discusses the immediately preceding condition in the
context of the explication given in the AK, i.e., as restricted to consciousnesses and
mental factors. Both Buddhapālita and Candrakīrti discuss the immediately preceding
condition by adverting to the material entities seed and sprout. Although Bhāviveka
critiques Buddhapalita's interpretation of MMK 1.9cd and speaks of consciousnesses
and mental factors in the course of the critique, he does not specifically attack
Buddhapālita's discussing the immediately preceding condition in terms of material
objects such as seed and sprout.
As indicated, Bhāviveka summarizes and criticizes Buddhapālita's commentary on
MMK 1.9cd. Repeating a now familiar complaint, he claims that Buddhapālita
merely provides a prasanga argument when he asserts that both cessation and arising
would be without a cause (*ahetuka) because the seed that has ceased and the effect
that has not arisen are non-existent, and declares that when the probandum and pro-
bans of the prasanga are reversed, one is confronted with the affirmative statements
that what has not ceased is a condition, because it has a cause, and that arising has
consciousnesses and mental factors which have not ceased as cause, because it (=
arising) has a cause. Thus, the reason "because it has a cause" will be either unestab-
lished (asiddha) or contradictory (viruddhārtha) (see Ames 1994: 115). Candrakīrti
ignores Bhāviveka's charges, in all likelihood because he has already, in his com-
mentary on MMK I.1, defended Buddhapalita's employment of such prasanga
statements by pointing out that they do not imply their opposite. Candrakīrti's own
reiteration of Buddhapālita's comments in the face of Bhāviveka's critique is ob-334
TRANSLATION
word[s] "not arisen" (anutpanna) [of 1.9a].609 Therefore [one should
understand]: And (ca) even if you maintain the cessation of seeds and
so forth when the sprout has not [yet] arisen (anutpanna), these both
[i.e., the cessation of the cause and the arising of the effect] end up
without a cause (ahetuka); thus, the immediately preceding
[condition] is not logically possible.
§148. Alternatively, having in mind that arising has been refuted with
"Not arisen from self, nor from other" [= MMK I.1], etc., he [=
Nāgārjuna] says,
When factors [without exception] have not arisen, cessation [of
the cause] is not possible,
Thus, the immediately preceding [condition] is not [logically]
possible.
Moreover,
And when [the cause] has ceased, what is the condition?
Here, the explanation [for MMK 1.9d] is just as the previous [one for
1.9d].
§149. Now, for the sake of the refutation of the own nature (svarūpa)
of the dominant condition (adhipatipratyaya), he [= Nāgārjuna]
610
states,
viously intended as implicit sanction of Buddhapālita's style of argumentation and its
content, and thus as an indirect rejection of Bhāviveka's complaints.
60⁹ Candrakīrti has taken the lead for his interpretation of "and" (ca) of MMK 1.9d
from Buddhapālita’s explanation: yang zhes bya ba’i sgra ni ’dir ma skyes pa la ltos
par blta bar bya'o || de yang ma skyes pa'i sgra la ltos nas | [1.9d:] 'gags na rkyen
yang gang zhig yin || ma skyes pa'i rkyen gang zhig yin || zhes bya bar sbyar ro || (BPcd
22.16-20). Bhāviveka states that the ca is employed for the sake of including two
negations, namely, that what has ceased is not an immediately preceding condition,
nor a condition in general; PP D 60a7; P 72a8-72b1: kyang (read: yang) zhes bya ba'i
sgra ni de ma thag pa’i rkyen nyid ma yin pa dang | spyi'i rkyen kyang (read: yang)
ma yin no (P: ||) zhes dgag pa bsdu ba'i phyir ro ||; see Kajiyama 1964: 121; Ames
1994: 115.
610 PSP Tib presents da ni bdag po'i rkyen bsal bar bzhed nas bshad pa for idānīm
adhipatipratyayasvarūpaniṣedhārtham āha. svarūpa does not occur in the similarlyPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
335
[MMK I.10]
Because there is no existence (sattā) of things that are without
own-being (svabhāva),
This [statement] "when this exists, that comes to be" is definitely
not tenable.611
In this system [of the opponent], the [defining] characteristic of the
dominant condition (adhipatipratyaya) is [formulated as]: The
[condition] owing to the existence of which [something] comes into
being is the dominant [condition] for that [thing] (yasmin sati yad
bhavati tat tasyadhipateyam). But when, because things are depend-
ently arisen (pratītyasamutpanna), own-being (svabhāva) does not
exist, how does what is designated as the cause, [expressed by]
"[when] this" (asmin), [exist] and how does what is designated as the
effect, [expressed by] "that" (idam), [exist]? Therefore, there is not,
also from the point of view of the [defining] characteristic, the
establishment of the [dominant] condition.612
constructed introductory sentences to MMK I.8 and 1.9. It has ostensibly been
included in MMK I.10's introductory sentence because both I.10 and Candrakīrti's
commentary on it make reference to the lack of own-being (svabhāva) of the
adhipatipratyaya.
611 Candrakīrti cites MMK I.10: bhāvānāṁ niḥsvabhāvānāṁ na sattā vidyate yataḥ |
satīdam asmin bhavatīty etan naivopapadyate ||. Garfield (1995: 119) renders the
Tibetan translation of MMK I.10 (dngos po rang bzhin med rnams kyi || yod pa gang
phyir yod min na || 'di yod pas na 'di 'byung zhes || bya ba 'di ni ʼthad ma yin ||) as “If
things did not exist [w]ithout essence, [t]he phrase, 'when this exists so this will be,'
[w]ould not be acceptable," arguing that the translations by Inada, etc., (in general in
line with mine) are "not supported by the dialectical structure of the chapter and
force an excessively negative interpretation on the chapter as a whole." In his attempt
to force an unwarranted positive interpretation on the kārikā, Garfield overlooks that
his translation is not supported by its wording or grammar. His translation ignores
gang phyir, assumes na to indicate a conditional construction (na should be construed
with gang phyir) and treats the second half of the verse as though it were the apo-
dosis of a conditional sentence. Nor is it acceptable to turn a blind eye to the fact that
this interpretation leaves the fourth condition unrefuted. It is quite clear that
Nāgārjuna declares in MMK I.1 that nothing whatsoever arises, sets forth in MMK
I.2 the four conditions said to be responsible for the arising of things and then
proceeds to refute them one by one in MMK I.7-10.
612 Candrakīrti considers the kārikā to refute the dominant condition through its
denial of the possibility of the existence of things that lack own-being. The sentence336
§150. At this point, [the opponent] says: [Because we] have observed
that cloth, etc., [is made] from threads, etc., threads, etc., [are main-
tained to be] the conditions of cloth, etc.
TRANSLATION
§151. Reply: There is absolutely no arising of results (phala) such as
cloth from the point of view of own nature (svarūpataḥ), [so] how
could it be established that conditions have the status of conditions
(pratyayatva)? And explaining the way in which there is not the
arising of results such as cloth, etc., he [= Nāgārjuna] states,
[MMK I.11]
And that result (phala) is not in the individual or collective
conditions.
asmin satīdam bhavati cited by Nāgārjuna in I.10cd is the first half of the famous
explication of dependent-arising asmin satīdam bhavaty asyotpādād idam utpadyate
(Pāli: imasmim sati idam hoti imass' uppādā idam uppajjati), the initial formulation
of which is attributed to the Buddha (see n. 86). The descriptive characterization of
the dominant condition, namely, yasmin sati yad bhavati tat tasyādhipateyam, is ob-
viously based on it. The dominant condition is rejected from the standpoint of the
ultimate on the ground that when any existence (sattā) of things without own-being is
impossible, one cannot speak of a condition, i.e., a dominant condition by virtue of
whose existence (asmin sati) a real effect arises. This same view of the intent of the
kārikā is presented even more lucidly by Buddhapālita: de Itar gang gi phyir dngos
po rang bzhin med pa rnams kyi yod pa zhes bya ba yod pa'i dngos po mi 'thad pa
de'i phyir gang yod na 'di yod pas zhes brjod par nus pa'i dngos po de nyid med do ||
'di yod pas zhes bya ba 'di la med na 'di 'byung zhes bya ba de 'thad par ga la 'gyur
(BPed 25.6-10) “Thus, because the existence (*sattā) of things without own-being,'
[that is,] real existence (*sadbhāva?), is not tenable, exactly that thing in regard to
which, when it exists, one is able to say, 'when this exists,' does not exist. If here
'when this exists' is not possible, how is it tenable that ‘that comes into being'?"
Bhāviveka, who has, following the AK, defined the adhipatipratyaya as bdag po'i
rkyen ni byed pa’i rgyu—but who in the PP addresses an opponent who characterizes
it as the opponent in the PsP does-considers MMK I.10 to be refuting both the
ultimate- and surface-level existence of the dominant condition; Bhāviveka states that
even according to worldly convention it is not accepted that an effect arises when
only a partial cause exists (according to Avalokitavrata: a partial cause = without the
other necessary conditions). Thus, as Nāgārjuna declares, the statement asmin sati
idam bhavati, which communicates that an effect arises when the dominant condition
is present, is not tenable: don dam pa (P: par) 'ba' zhig tu yang ma zad kyi | ji ltar ʼjig
rten gyi tha snyad du yang ste | rgyu nyi tshe yod du zin kyang 'bras bu skye bar khas
ma blangs pa'i phyir | 'di yod pas ni 'di 'byung zhes || bya ba de ni 'thad ma yin || (PP
D 61a1-2; P 73a3-4).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
337
But how could that which is not in [its] conditions come from
conditions?613
As regards this, cloth is not in each of the individual [conditions],
such as the threads, the brush, the loom, the shuttle and the stick,
because it is not perceived in them, and because of the entailment of a
multitude (bahutva) of effects owing to the multitude of causes. Cloth
is also not in the collected (samudita) threads and so forth, because it
does not exist in each of the parts, and because [there would be] the
consequence that one effect would arise bit by bit (khandaśaḥ) [i.e.,
in a fragmentary, piecemeal way]. Therefore, because a result does
not exist, conditions do not exist from the point of view of own-
being 614
613 Candrakīrti cites MMK I.11: na ca vyastasamasteṣu pratyayeṣv asti tat phalam |
pratyayebhyaḥ katham tac ca bhaven na pratyayeṣu yat ||. PsP Tib for MMK I.11ab
reads rkyen rnams so so 'dus pa la || 'bras bu de ni med pa nyid ||. Jñānagarbha and
Klu'i rgyal mtshan's translation for MMK I.11 also attests nyid, which might lead
one to think that they read naiva instead of na ca. All of the Skt manuscripts collated
for this section of the PsP read na ca. Buddhapālita glosses the word translated into
Tibetan as nyid with kho na (*eva) (BPed 26.1: nyid ces bya ba'i sgra ni kho na zhes
bya ba'i don to ||); the gloss would hardly have been necessary had the kārikā in his
MMK manuscript read naiva. Were Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan inspired to
translate ca as nyid based on Bhāviveka's explanatory sentence don dam par 'bras bu
skye ba med pa kho na ste | rkyen rnams la med do zhes bya ba’i tshig gi don to | (PP
D 61b1; P 73b4)?
614 Candrakīrti's comments on this occasion differ from those of Buddhapālita. After
stating that an effect which already exists in conditions would have no need for
conditions, Buddhapālita takes up a line of argumentation that starts from the
premise that the result exists in the many conditions that produce it and inquires
whether it would then partially or fully exist in each individual condition. According
to Buddhapālita, if it fully existed in each condition, there could not be many
conditions for the arising of the result, and there would be the consequence that the
result would arise from each condition without depending on other conditions; but if
it only partially existed in each condition, there would be the consequence that part of
the effect would arise from each condition without depending on other conditions: de
la re zhig gal te re re la yongs su rdzogs par yod par brtags na ni rkyen du mar mi
'gyur te re re la yang yod pa’i phyir mi ltos par re re las kyang 'bras bu skye bar thal
bar 'gyur ro || ci ste rkyen rnams la 'bras bu’i cha shas yod par brtags na ni | de lta na
yang mi ltos par re re las 'bras bu'i cha shas skye bar thal bar 'gyur bas de yang mi
'dod de (BPed 26.14-19). Bhāviveka states only that ultimately, the result does not
arise because it does not exist in the conditions, and then rhetorically asks how338
§152. [MMK I.12 abc₁]
But if that result, while not existing [in conditions], proceeds
from conditions,615
[If this] were [your] intent,
[MMK I.12c₂-d]
Why does [it] not proceed from non-conditions too?616
TRANSLATION
yoghurt could arise from threads when it does not exist in them (PP D 61b1-2; P
73b5: rgyu spun dag las zho ji ltar 'byung ste de dag la zho med pa'i phyir ro ).
615 Candrakīrti cites MMK I.12abc₁: athāsad api tat tebhyaḥ pratyayebhyaḥ pra-
vartate | phalam. See the following note.
616 MMK I.12c₂-d: apratyayebhyo 'pi kasmān nābhipravartate ||. None of the PSP
manuscripts attest these last five words of the kārikā. De La Vallée Poussin (PSP₁ 88
and n. 1) reconstructs MMK I.12 to read (unmetrically) athāsad api tat tebhyaḥ
[pratyayebhyaḥ pravartate | apratyayebhyo 'pi kasmān nābhi]pravartate phalam ||.
Saito (1984: 230, n. 41 and 1985: 25f.) emends to athāsad api tat tebhyaḥ
[pratyayebhyah] pravartate | phalam apratyayebhyo 'pi kasmān nābhipravartate ||.
Mss P and Q indeed attest MMK I.12abc, as athāsad api tat tebhyaḥ pratyayebhyaḥ
pravartate phalam. Saito's emendation for MMK I.12c2-d is based on Candrakīrti's
commentary, in which the words of I.12c₂-d have been cited (MMK I.12c₂-d under-
lined): apratyayebhyo 'pi vīraṇādibhyaḥ kasmān nābhipravartate pața iti.
The loss of the last five words was probably caused by an eyeskip from
apratyayebhyo of I.12c to apratyayeṣu, the first word of Candrakīrti's commentary.
This eyeskip must have occurred early on in the transmission of the PsP, for these
same last five words of MMK I.12 seem also to have been missing in the two manu-
scripts relied on by the translators of PsP Tib. Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan's
version of MMK I.12 as found in ABh, BP and PP reads: ci ste de ni med par yang ||
rkyen de dag las skye 'gyur na || rkyen min las kyang 'bras bu ni || ci yi¹ phyir na skye
mi 'gyur || (¹BP ci'i for ci yi) (see Saito's [1984: 230, n. 41] remarks on the inappro-
priateness of this version in connection with the MMK I.12 commentaries in ABh
and BP). Mahasumati and Pa tshab's version as found in P MMK₁ reads: ci ste 'bras
bu de med kyang || rkyen de dag las skye 'gyur na || rkyen ma yin pa dag las kyang || ci
yi phyir na skye mi 'gyur ||. The last two quarters are completely missing in PsP Tib D
and C; D and C read: ci ste de ni med par yang || rkyen de dag las skye 'gyur na || zhes
bya bar bsams par gyur na ni | rkyen ma yin pa dag la yang ...; this corresponds with
the manuscripts' athāsad api tat tebhyaḥ pratyayebhyaḥ pravartate | ... ity abhiprāyaḥ
syāt | apratyayeṣv api ... (an equivalent for phalam does not appear in D and C Tib).
Even though a version of the entire kārikā appears in PsP Tib P, N and G, the fact
that the phrase ity abhiprāyaḥ syāt (zhes bya bar bsams bar gyur na ni), which can
only be referring to the first half of MMK I.12, occurs in P, N and G only after the
translation of the entire kārikā suggests that I.12cd was inserted once it was noticed
that the kārikā was incomplete albeit in the wrong place, i.e., not after zhes bya barPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
339
Since there is not a result in non-conditions either, why does cloth not
proceed from non-conditions too, [i.e.,] from grass and so forth [in
which it likewise does not exist]?6¹7 Thus, there is no proceeding of a
result from the point of view of own nature.
§153. At this point, [the opponent] states: If the result would be other
(anya) and the conditions other [i.e., if result and conditions would be
bsams bar gyur na ni but before it—and in a different version than that of MMKT
(pāda c of PsP Tib P, N, and G reads rkyen min las kyang 'bras bu ni ||, i.e., in corres-
pondence with Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan's version of the pāda, instead of
with Mahāsumati and Pa tshab's MMK version rkyen ma yin pa dag las kyang). The
original Tibetan translation of the PsP seems then to have lacked the last half of the
kārikā.
T
As Saito has noted, the translation ci ste 'bras bu de med kyang for the first quarter in
PSP Tib P, N, and G, as opposed to the translation ci ste de ni med par yang in PsP
Tib D and C, appears to reflect an attempt on the part of the translators of the PsP to
bring Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan's translation ci ste de ni med par yang into
line with Candrakīrti’s interpretation of MMK I.12, according to which there is an
enjambment to phala, the first word of the (Sanskrit's) third quarter (the first quarter
in P MMKT contains the revised version as found in PsP Tib P, N, and G; D MMKT
contains the older version ci ste de ni med par yang). That PsP Tib D and C present
Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan's version of the first pāda appears to indicate
that an editor was aware of this other version of the kārikā and, possibly disturbed by
the PSP translators' emendation of I.12a to include 'bras bu, decided to revert to
Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan's version (note, however, that in all the editions
of the PSP the commentary's rkyen ma yin pa dag la yang 'bras bu yod pa ma yin pas
[= apratyayeṣv api nāsti phalam iti] has been punctuated as if it were I.12cd: rkyen
ma yin pa dag la yang || 'bras bu yod pa ma yin pas ||). MMK I.12 is cited at MABhed
93.19-94.2 in the version ci ste de ni med par yang || rkyen de dag las skyes 'gyur na ||
rkyen ma yin pa dag las kyang || ci yi phyir na skye mi 'gyur ||, that is, with
Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan's version of the first pāda but with the (re-
vised?) version of pāda c that appears in Mahāsumati and Pa tshab’s MMK, transla-
tion. This same version appears in D MMKT.
617 Buddhapālita does little more than paraphrase MMK I.12; he does not include the
examples cloth and grass. Bhāviveka equates the kārikā statement with the assertion
"If sound, which is created, is permanent, why is a pot, which is also created, not per-
manent?" (dper na gal te sgra byas pa rtag na bum pa byas pa yang ci’i phyir mi rtag
ces bya ba lta bu) and presents the relevant inference (sgra ni mi rtag ste || byas pa'i
phyir bum pa bzhin) as a point of comparison for the inference he adduces for MMK
I.12: don dam par myu gus stong pa’i 'bru (D: 'bras bu) la sogs pa las de skye bar mi
'thad de | 'bras bu yin pa'i phyir dper na zho bzhin (see PP D 61b4-5; P 73b8-74a1;
Kajiyama 1964: 125; Ames 1994: 118).340
TRANSLATION
different things], then the [following] reflection might be [meaning-
ful]: "Does the result exist in the conditions [or] not?" But there is not
a separate result; rather, [the result] is simply made of conditions
(pratyayamaya).61
§154. Reply:
[MMK I.13]
On the one hand, the result is made of conditions; on the other,
the conditions are not made of themselves (asvayammaya).
How is that result, which is made of [conditions] not made of
themselves, made of conditions?619
If it is determined [by you] that the result is made of conditions, [that
is, the result is] the modification (vikāra) of [its] conditions, that is
not reasonable, because those conditions, for their part, are not made
of themselves; the meaning is: [they] do not have the own-being of
conditions (apratyayasvabhāva). [Opponent:] [But] cloth is obviously
(hi) made of threads! 620 Reply: There might be cloth if the threads
themselves were established by own-being. Those [threads], [being]
made of filaments (amsumaya), [being] the modification of filaments,
are of course not established by own-being. And therefore how will
that result called cloth, which is from those [conditions] not made of
themselves (asvammaya), be made of threads?621
618 PSP Tib translates pratyayamaya as rkyen gyi rang bzhin throughout.
619 Candrakīrti cites MMK I.13: phalam ca pratyayamayam pratyayāś cāsvayam-
mayāḥ | phalam asvamayebhyo yat tat pratyayamayam katham ||. The translators of
the PSP have emended Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan's translation of the kārikā
(found in ABh, BP and PP), which reads 'bras rkyen las byung yin na || rkyen
rnams rang las byung ma yin || rang byung min las 'bras bu gang || de ni ji ltar rkyen
las byung ||, to 'bras bu rkyen gyi rang bzhin na || rkyen rnams bdag gi rang bzhin min
|| bdag dngos min las 'bras bu gang || de ni ji ltar rkyen rang bzhin ||.
620 PSP Tib understands the syntax differently, and connects ucyate with the oppon-
ent's statement: snam bu ni snal ma'i rang bzhin can no zhes bya bar brjod na ni | gal
te snal ma dag "One says [e.g.,] that cloth is made of threads. [To this, we reply:]
If the threads ...."
621 Candrakīrti's comments on the example of cloth and threads have been inspired
by BP: 'di ltar gal te rgyu spun dag rang nyid rab tu grub na ni rang las byung barPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
341
As it has been stated [in the Catuḥśataka],
A pot is established by virtue of a cause, [its] cause is established
by virtue of something else (anyataḥ).
How could that which is not etablished by itself (svataḥ) produce
another [thing]?622
yang 'gyur bas | des na snam bu rgyu spun dag las byung ba zhes bya ba de yang
'thad par 'gyur ba zhig na ... (BPed 28.6-8). Buddhapālita goes on to argue that the
threads themselves are made of [their own] causes (rgyu las byung ba; *kāraṇamaya;
cf. BPed 28.8-11). Bhāviveka rejects the opponent's claim that the result is made of
conditions, in the way that a pot is made of clay, on the ground that Nāgārjuna has
already refuted that conditions have the nature of conditions. The question posed in
MMK I.13cd, he states, can be compared to "If Devarāta practised celibacy from his
youth, how is Bharata his son?”; PP D 62a1; P 74a5: dper na gal te de (D: omits de)
va rā ta gzhon nu nas tshangs par spyod pa yin na | bha (D, P add va [PPT without
va]) ra ta ji ltar de’i bu yin | zhes zer ba lta bu.
622 Candrakīrti cites CŚ XIV.13: ghataḥ kāraṇataḥ siddhaḥ siddham kāraṇam
anyataḥ | siddhir yasya svato nāsti tad anyaj janayet katham ||. Whereas ms Q attests
ghataḥ as the śloka's first word, ms P and the paper manuscripts read pataḥ and
paṭhaḥ (the ya of B’s yaṭaḥ is merely a miswriting of pa), and PsP Tib attests snam
bu. The CŚ manuscript's ghataḥ is correct given the context in the relevant section of
the CŚ, and Candrakīrti refers consistently to ghataḥ in his commentary on CŚ
XIV.9-14 (see CŚTed 332-340; see also Lang 1986: 128-130 and Lang 1976: 76 and
the extended preceding discussion on pot; in CŚȚ on CŚ XIV.13, the causes of the
ghata are asserted to be kapālāni). CŚ XIV.13 is also quoted by Buddhapālita in his
commentary on MMK I.13, but BP Tib, like PSP Tib, attests snam bu, not bum pa.
Saito (1984: 231, n. 43) has suggested that Buddhapālita may have relied on a CŚ ms
that read pataḥ or changed the reading himself. Alternatively, the BP translators may
have relied on a BP Skt ms that read paṭaḥ, changed from ghaṭaḥ because paṭaḥ
better suits the context in this section of BP; the PsP's surrounding focus on paṭaḥ
may likewise explain the change of ghaṭaḥ to paṭaḥ in ms P and the paper manu-
scripts. Saito (1984: 231, n. 43), with reference to PsP₁, PsP Tib and BP Tib’s
reading, hypothesizes that Candrakīrti may have quoted the śloka directly from
Buddhapālita, "otherwise this problem might cast a doubt over the authorship of PsP
or CŚT." Although I do not think that the difference in readings is weighty enough to
lead to questions of authorship, it is true that Candrakīrti relies heavily on BP for his
commentary on MMK I.2-13 and possible that he copied the śloka with paṭaḥ—if
this was the original BP reading or was in the BP ms available to him-directly from
BP and did not notice the error (according to Felix Erb, Candrakīrti wrote his
commentary on CŚ only after composing MABh and PsP; for his proposed succes-
sion of Candrakīrti's works, see Erb 1997: 14). Owing to the fact that ms Q attests
the CŚ's reading ghaṭaḥ, I have accepted it for the critical edition, even though other
scenarios like those described regarding pataḥ are possible.342
TRANSLATION
[MMK I.14a]
Therefore, not [as something] made of conditions 623
does the result exist.
§155. [Opponent:]624 Then let [the result] be made of non-conditions
(apratyayamaya)!
[MMK I.14bc₁]
Not [as something] made of non-conditions does the result
exist.625
When cloth made of threads does not exist, then how could there be
the contrary, [namely, cloth] made of grass?626
§156. At this point, [the opponent says]: It may be [true] that there is
no result, but there is a determination (niyama) of conditions and non-
conditions. And you likewise say [in MMK I.12] that if the result
which doesn't exist [in conditions] proceeds from conditions, "why
does [it] not proceed from non-conditions too?”627 It does not make
623 Candrakīrti cites MMK I.14a: tasmān na pratyayamayam.
624 PSP Tib makes clear that the opponent is speaking: 'o na rkyen ma yin pa'i rang
bzhin du 'gyur ro zhe na (PsP Skt: apratyayamayam tarhy astu).
625 Candrakīrti cites MMK I.14bc₁: nāpratyayamayam phalam | samvidyate. The PSP
translators have emended Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan's translation of MMK
I.14ab, which reads de'i phyir rkyen las byung ma yin || rkyen min las byung 'bras bu
ni ||, to de'i phyir rkyen gyi rang bzhin min || rkyen min rang bzhin 'bras bu ni ||.
626
Cp. BPed 29.3-5: gang gi tshe snam bu rgyu spun las byung bar mi 'thad pa de'i
tshe snam bu rtsi rkyang las byung ngo || zhes bya ba 'jig rten dang ʼgal ba 'di ji ltar
'thad par 'gyur | de'i phyir 'bras bu rkyen ma yin pa las byung ba yang med do.
Candrakīrti's comment on MMK XX.24b (MMK XX.24ab: na sāmagrīkṛtam tasmān
nāsāmagrīkṛtam phalam ) is similar to his present comment on MMK I.14bc₁ (PSP₁
407.3): yadā sāmagrīkṛtam phalam na sambhavati tadā katham atyantaviruddham
asāmagrīkṛtam bhavisyati.
627 Candrakīrti paraphrases MMK I.12abc, but then quotes MMK I.12c₂-d (missing in
all manuscripts on the earlier occasion of the kārikā citation; see n. 616): apratyaye-
bhyo pi kasmān nābhipravartate. PsP Tib has the opponent paraphrase the entire
kārikā.343
sense, however, if a result called cloth or mat does not, [as you say,
ever] exist, that threads and grass could be conditions and non-condi-
tions.628 On account of this, [just as conditions and non-conditions,]
the result also exists.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§157. Reply: There might be a result if [these] very conditions and
non-conditions existed.62⁹ [Yet] obviously, [only] if a result existed
would it be possible [to say]: "These are the conditions of this
628
I accept ms Q's reading pratyayāpratyayatvam because it makes more sense in the
context than ms P’s pratyayānāṁ pratyayatvam and because it appears to represent
the lectio difficilior, at least within the framework of the sentence. PsP Tib supports
ms Q with rkyen dang rkyen ma yin pa nyid (PsP Tib reads snam bu dang re lde zhes
bya ba'i 'bras bu med na ni snal ma dang 'jag ma dag rkyen dang rkyen ma yin pa
nyid du yang mi rigs te for PsP Skt's na cāsati phale paṭakaṭākhye tantuvīraṇānām
pratyayapratyayatvam yuktam). PsP Tib has of course been contaminated with
revised and interpolated readings from a manuscript earlier in Q’s line, but in the
present case I suspect that P's reading is faulty. Were P's reading pratyayānām pra-
tyayatvam to be accepted, the idea being introduced by the opponent would be that if
a result called cloth or mat does not exist, it is not reasonable that the conditions
threads and grass should have the status of conditions (na pratyayānām pratyaya-
tvam yuktam). The opponent's argument, however, centres on the fact that the
Madhyamikas indeed make a determination of conditions and non-conditions (pra-
tyayāpratyayaniyama). Note also that in his reply, Candrakīrti refers twice to the pair
conditions and non-conditions. Ms Q's reading pratyayāpratyayatvam takes both
types of conditions into account, whereas ms P's only considers conditions. It would
seem, then, that P's reading represents the simplified version. The original pratya-
yāpratyayatvam would have been changed in P (or a manuscript earlier in its line)
because it was assumed that non-conditions were not topical in the sentence: the
mention of threads was connected with cloth and that of grass with mats. Candrakīrti
presumably intended, however, to include both: threads are to be viewed as the
conditions for cloth and as the non-conditions for mats, and grass as the condition for
mats but the non-condition for cloth.
629 PsP Tib translates the sentence as gal te 'bras bu yod par gyur na ni rkyen dang
rkyen ma yin pa dag tu 'gyur ro “If a result existed, [these] very conditions and non-
conditions might exist." Thus yadi of syāt phalam yadi is taken to belong to the
protasis. This interpretation is unusual, given that in similar syāt yadi construc-
tions Candrakīrti's normally intends yadi to be construed with the apodosis. The
opponent has argued for the existence of the result because he sees the Mādhyamika
as accepting a determination of both conditions and non-conditions. As I understand
the Sanskrit, Candrakīrti focusses the sentence on the opponent's assumption of the
acceptance of the existence of these very conditions and non-conditions.344
[result], these are non-conditions [for it]."630 But that [result], being
analyzed [as above], does not exist.
[MMK I.14c₂d]
Because a result does not exist, how are there conditions and
non-conditions?631
TRANSLATION
The [dvandva] compound [pratyayāpratyayāḥ should be dissolved as]
"conditions and non-conditions."632 Therefore, there is no arising of
things by own-being.633
630 Candrakīrti takes his lead from Buddhapalita in presenting an opponent who
argues for the existence of the result on the basis of the determination of conditions
and non-conditions and in rejecting the opponent's assertion that this determination
allows for the statement "These are its conditions, these are non-conditions [for it]."
See BPed 29.7-13: smras pa | rkyen rnams ni yod pa kho na yin te | ci'i phyir zhe na |
rkyen dang rkyen ma yin pa nges pa'i phyir ro || 'di na rkyen dang rkyen ma yin pa
nges pa mthong ste | 'bru dag las 'bru mar kho na 'byung gi mar mi 'byung ngo || zho
las ni mar kho na 'byung gi 'bru mar mi 'byung ngo | bye ma dag las ni de gnyi ga mi
'byung ngo || 'di ltar gang gi phyir ’di dag ni 'di'i rkyen yin no || 'di dag ni 'di'i rkyen
ma yin no zhes bya ba de yod pas de'i phyir rkyen 'grub po || (Buddhapālita considers
1.14cd as providing the reply to this objection; see his commentary on the half-verse
at BPed 29.17-23).
631 Candrakīrti cites MMK I.14c₂d: phalābhāvāt pratyayāpratyayāḥ kutaḥ ||.
632 Bhāviveka's interpretation of MMK I.14c₂d is quite different from that of the
other commentators, for he explains it to mean "Because the result does not exist,
how is the non-condition a condition?" According to Kajiyama (1964: 127, n. 1),
"Nach Bhāviveka ist v. 14c-d zu lesen: ... phalābhāvāt pratyayo 'pratyayaḥ kutaḥ”;
Ames (1994: 133, n. 172) states that Bhāviveka “evidently read pratyayo 'pratyayaḥ
kutaḥ.” This divergent interpretation probably explains why Candrakīrti considers it
necessary to draw attention to the compound he read in his manuscript of the MMK
and to clarify it as a dvandva. Bhāviveka understands MMK I.14d to mean that non-
conditions cannot have the nature of conditions or, alternatively, that conditions
which are impossible because there is no result cannot be conditions: sbyor ba rnam
par dbye ba byas nas rkyen min zhes bya ba dang | rkyen du ga la 'gyur zhes bya ba
bshad de | rkyen ma yin pa rnams rkyen gyi ngo ba nyid du mi 'gyur ro (P: ||) zhes bya
ba'i tshig gi don to || yang na ... (MMK I.14) de’i bdag nyid ma yin pa'i rkyen 'thad
pa med pa rnams rkyen du ga la 'gyur te | mi 'gyur ba kho na yin no zhes bya ba'i
tshig gi don (see PP D 62a6-62b1; P 74b4-6; Kajiyama 1964: 127; Ames 1994:
120f.).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
633
345
§158. As stated in the Noble Ratnākarasūtra,
Ignorance is empty,634 for it does not exist anywhere,635 like the
track of a bird in the sky.
636
That which nowhere exists by own-being can never become the
cause of something else.637
For how can something whose own-being is not at all obtained,
which is without own-being, be the condition for something else?
How could it, lacking own-being, produce another? This reason
has been taught by the One Well Gone.638
All dharmas are unmoving (acala), firmly abiding, without
change (nirvikāra), without misfortune (nirupadrava), secure
(siva),
Buddhapālita closes his commentary on the first chapter with the assertion that
since a result and conditions and non-conditions do not exist, the expression “arising”
is proven to be a mere convention: 'bras bu dang rkyen dang rkyen ma yin pa dag
med pas skye bar brjod pa ni tha snyad tsam du grub po (BPed 29.23-30.2). He does
not, as Bhāviveka and Candrakīrti do, append scriptural citations.
634 PSP₁ 90: sūnyavidya. PsP Tib: stong pa rig pa “knowledge of emptiness" (the first
phrase reads gang na’ang stong pa rig pa med pa ni: “The knowledge of emptiness
does not exist anywhere"). *LȚ's author, however, explains sūnyavidya as śūnyā
'vidyā: "ignorance is empty" (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 126, 151 [fol. 3a6]); śūnyavidya of
the verse must thus have been understood as sūny' avidya. This interpretation makes
more sense than Tib does in the context of PsP's first chapter, and I thus accept it, for
avidyā would refer to the initial link of the twelve-linked pratītyasamutpāda. When
this most fundamental component of the chain is empty, the rest of the members are
as a consequence also empty.
635 I interpret hi in its sense of indicating a reason. It could alternatively be
understood as reminding readers of something already known to them: "Ignorance is
empty; it obviously does not exist anywhere, like ... ."
636 *LȚ's author glosses antarīkṣi śakunasya vā padam with śakuner iva padam yathā
antarīkṣe nāsti (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 126, 151 [fol. 3a6]).
637 RK Tib (P 296a8-297a1; D 285b): gang na’ang stong pa (D: par) rig pa ma mchis
par || nam mkha' bar snang bya yi rjes dang mtshungs || gang na’ang ngo bo nyid ni
ma mchis pa || de ni nams kyang gzhan (P: gzhin) gyi rgyur (P: sgyur) mi 'gyur ||.
638 RK Tib (P 297a1-2; D 285b): gang gi (D: gis) ngo bo nyid ni mi rnyed par rang
||
bzhin de med ji ltar gzhan gyi rkyen || rang bzhin med pa gzhan gyis ci zhig bskyed (D:
skyed) || rgyu de bde bar gshegs pas bstan pa’o ||.346
TRANSLATION
Not producing [anything], like the sky.63⁹ The unknowing world
is disoriented in regard to this.
640
Just as a mountain of rock is unshakable, so are dharmas forever
unshakable.
They do not die, nor are they reborn. Thus has the true nature of
things been taught by the Conqueror.
641
642
643
Similarly,
The Conqueror, the Lion of men, teaches the dharma (= nirvāṇa)
which neither originates, would be reborn,643 nor dies or ages.
[He]644 has placed hundreds of beings there.645
639
Alternatively, "Not arising, like the sky." PsP Tib attests shes pa med pa (RK Tib:
rig pa ma mchis) for ajānaka (ji ltar nam mkha' shes pa med pa bzhin || “not
knowing, like the sky"), which would seem to be less appropriate. *LȚ's author must
have read antarīkṣapathatulya 'jānakā as a single compound (ᵒtulyajānakā), that is,
he did not understand the final member to have a negation. He comments:
antarīkṣapatho gaganam tena tulyā ekarūpā jāyante “the atmosphere, that is, the sky;
they arise with a single form similar to that [sky]" (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 126, 151 [fol.
3a6]).
640
RK Tib (P 297a2-3; D 285b): thams cad chos kyang mi g-yo brtan par gnas || mi
'gyur 'tshe ba ma mchis zhi ba ste || ji ltar nam mkha' rig pa ma mchis ltar || de la mi
mdzangs (P: ’dzangs) 'gro ba myos par 'gyur ||.
641 RK Tib (P 297a3-4; D 285b): ji ltar ri bo dag ni mi sgul ba || de bzhin chos rnams
rtag tu bskyod mi nus || 'chi 'pho ma mchis skye ba ma mchis pa'i (D: pa’o) || chos
rnams de ltar rgyal bas rab tu bstan ||. D’s pa’o allows RK Tib to better mirror the
Sanskrit, but I assume that P's pa’i (cf. PsP Tib's skye ba med pa yi ||), the lectio
dificilior, is or is closer to the original translation and that D's reading is the result of
an editorial change.
642 The next triplet of verses from the
is cited again the PSP on MMK XIII.6.
The wording of RK Tib's version (P 272a2-4; D 261b-262a) sometimes differs from
that of PsP Tib. These verses and others that follow in the sūtra have most recently
been translated into English by Galloway (2001: 344f.), but the translation is often
problematic.
Stcherbatsky's (1927: 181, n. 8) comment that upapadyī is “probably in the sense
of sthita as a member of the series utpāda, sthiti, jarā, anityatā” is clearly mistaken
(Schayer [1931: 34, n. 27] refers to this interpretation). I understand it as an iș-aorist
(cf. BHSG § 32.16) used in an optative/future sense (cf. BHSG § 32.119 ff.).
644 RK Tib: drang srong chen pos (and without an equivalent for śatāni).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
347
Whatever has no own-being is not found by anyone to have
other-being.
[It] is found neither internally nor externally. [Yet] the Protector
has placed [beings] there.646
The peaceful state (gati) was declared by the One Well Gone; but
no state is perceived;
[You,] released from the states [of existence] (gati), dwell in it.
Released, [You] release many beings."
647
And so on in detail.
§159. [Here ends] the first chapter called "Examination of Conditions"
in the Prasannapadā, a Commentary on the Madhyamaka[-śāstra]
composed by the Master Candrakīrti.
645 RK Tib (P 272a2; D 261b): chos gang skye ba ma mchis 'byung ma mchis || 'chi
'pho ma mchis rga bar mi 'gyur ba || skyes bu rgyal ba seng ge de ston cing || drang
srong chen pos sems can de la bkod ||.
646 RK Tib (P 272a2-3; D 262a): gang la ngos po ci yang ma mchis shing || gzhan gyi
dngos po'ang sus kyang ma rnyed pa || nang na ma lags slad rol dag na yang || dngos
po mi rnyed de la mgon pos bkod ||.
647 RK Tib (P 272a3-4; D 262a): bde bar gshegs pas zhi ba'i 'gro (P: blo) gsungs
kyang ||'gro ba gang yang (P: la) rnyed par mi 'gyur te || de dag 'gro las grol bar
rnam par gsungs || grol nas sems can mang po rab tu 'grol ||.AppendicesAppendices
Appendix I (re: §2., n. 31 & 32)
sambandha, abhidheya and prayojana
1. Both the threefold group of sambandha, abhidheya and prayojana
and the fourfold one which additionally includes prayojanaprayojana
on occasion include a fifth member, the "discourse" (abhidhāna, rjod
pa), often translated as "text" (cf. Broido 1983: 6). Jeffrey Schoening
(1995: 32-36) observes that the members mentioned in sūtra com-
mentaries vary from commentary to commentary, referring to one
sūtra commentary that lists four introductory terms, namely, the
connection, subject matter, purpose, and purpose of the purpose, and
then explains six members, viz., the four announced plus the text and
the ultimate purpose (dgos pa mthar thug pa, *prayojananiṣṭhā); he
notes other commentaries that also discuss an “ultimate purpose." It
may be noted in this connection that Prajñākaramati, at the beginning
of his commentary on the first verse of the BCA, makes topical the
sambandha, abhidheya and prayojana, but in the explanation of the
referents of the three, brings the abhidhāna into the discussion, and
also explains the prayojana in terms of both the abhidhāna and the
abhidheya; the prayojana of the abhidheya (Buddhahood) is desig-
nated the prayojananiṣṭhā (see BCAP 4.20-5.6). Dharmottara, in his
Tīkā to Nyāyabindu I.1 (ed. Ācārya Śrīcandrasekhara Śāstrī, Kashi
Sanskrit Series 22, 2nd ed., Banaras 1954, pp. 2-4), presents, in
addition to the sambandha and abhidheya, an abhidheyaprayojana (in
this case sarvapuruṣārthasiddhi), but also refers to the sabdaprayoja-
na, the prakaraṇaprayojana, and even to the vaktuḥ prayojana and
the śrotuḥ prayojana. In referring to the abhidheyaprayojana, he ex-
plains that if the subject matter lacks a purpose, even the arrangement
of words for the sake of understanding the subject matter should not352
be undertaken, “just as a circumspect person, on account of the lack
of a purpose to crows' teeth, should not begin an inquiry into them"
(yathā kākadantaprayojanābhāvān na tatparīkṣārambhaṇīyā prekṣā-
vatā).
APPENDICES
Although Candrakīrti does not explain why it is necessary to refer to
the abhidheya, sambandha and prayojana, some other Indian authors
do. Kumārila commences a discussion of the prayojana and sam-
bandha of the MS and the śāstra based on it in ŚV I.12, where he
poses the rhetorical question sarvasyaiva hi śāstrasya karmaṇo vāpi
kasyacit | yāvat prayojanam noktam tāvat tat kena gṛhyate ||. He
asserts that especially in the case of Mīmāmsā, it is imperative that
the purpose be stated right at the beginning, since without an
explanation of what can be achieved, the addressee will not be
inspired to listen to the exposition; the commentator Päārtha-
sārathimiśra adds that Mīmāmsā, based on many other sciences, is
"bahvāyāsasādhyā," certainly a deterrent if the reward for such effort
is not clear. One is reminded of Kumārila's assertion when one reads
in the Nyāyamañjarī (ed. Varadacharya, Mysore 1969, p. 13) the
versified response of Jayanta Bhatta to the question of the use of
stating the abhidheya and prayojana at the beginning of a śāstra:
ādivākyam prayoktavyam abhidheyaprayojane pratipadayitum śrotr-
pravāhotsāhasiddhaye || abhidheyaphalajñānavirahastamitodyamāḥ
śrotum alpam api grantham ādriyante na surayaḥ ||. In the discussion
which follows, he claims that the first sentence of the Nyāyasūtra
provides (cursory) knowledge of the prayojana, and that doubt
(samsaya) with regard to the matter spurs the hearer to activity, i.e.,
to engage with the rest of the Nyāyasūtra. Haribhadra, who relies
heavily on the discussion of the terms found at the beginning of
Kamalaśīla's TSP and incorporates passages from both Vinītadeva's
and Dharmottara's Tīkā-s on Nyāyabindu I.1 into his discussion in
the Abhisamayalankārālokā (ed. U. Wogihara, Tokyo, 1932-35, pp.
2.3-5.5), claims that if the sambandha and abhidheya were not to be
stated, then people would suspect that the text is unrelated and useless
like the statements of lunatics and such, with the result that no one
would even start to listen (yadi sambandhābhidheyam asya na kathye-
ta tadonmattādivākyavad asambandham anarthakam cety aśankayā
na kaścit pravartate 'pi śrotum; cp. TSP 2.9: yady abhidheyam asyaPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
353
na kathyeta tadonmattādivākyavad ānarthakyam sambhāvayan pre-
kṣāvān na pravartetapi śrotum; cp. also BCAP 5.11-12: anyatha 'na-
bhidheyādiśankyā prekṣāvatām atra pravṛttir na syāt).
2. The connection (sambandha) as presented by many commentators
is the connection or relation existing between two of the other
introductory terms, usually that occurring between the subject matter
(abhidheya) and discourse/text (abhidhāna) or prakaraṇa/śāstra
(Gerow 2008: ix: “the text itself should pertain profitably to that
subject matter") which are sometimes said to be in a vacya-vācaka
relationship and/or that between the purpose (prayojana) and the
discourse, etc., or between the purpose and the subject matter, both
often described as an upeya-upāya or sādhya-sādhana relationship
(see also PSP₁ 3, n. 2). While commentators can usually point to the
exact words they hold to refer to the subject matter and the purpose in
the root text (e.g., Dharmottara, commenting on Nyāyabindu I.1, i.e.,
on samyagjñānapūrvikā sarvapuruṣārthasiddhir iti tad vyutpadyate,
determines that samyagjñāna is the abhidheya and sarvapuruṣārtha-
siddhi the prayojana), words expressing the connection are rarely
indicated; the connection is therefore often claimed to be stated by the
"force" of the words, i.e., by implication (samarthyāt). Kamalaśīla
explains that in the case of a sādhya-sādhana relationship it is not
necessary for the connection to be explicitly stated: sa ca sādhya-
sādhanabhāvaḥ prayojanābhidhānād eva darsitaḥ tathā hīdam asya
prayojanam iti darśayatā darśitam bhavati - idam asya sādhanam iti
na hi yo yan na sādhayati tat tasya prayojanam bhavaty atiprasangāt
tasmāt sāmarthyalabhyatvān nāsau prayojanābhidheyābhyām pṛthag
abhidhānīyaḥ (TSP 12.11-15). Cp. also Kumārila, who considers the
"connection" pertaining to the MS as obtaining between the treatise
and the purpose (SV I.18): śāstram prayojanam caiva sam-
bandhasyāśrayāv ubhau | taduktyantargatas tasmād bhinno noktaḥ
prayojanāt || "The treatise and the purpose are the substrata of the
connection. Therefore, inasmuch as it (= the connection) is included
in the mentioning of that [purpose], [the connection] is not stated
separately from the purpose."
In the PSP, however, the connection presented does not line up with
the type of sambandha that expresses the relation between two of the354
other introductory terms. The sambandha described in the PSP
appears to be in the same class as one of the types of connection
referred to by Kumārila, both of which are rejected by him as the
connection applying to the MS (see ŚV I.23). He refers, first, to the
type of sambandha that is expressed as the relation between the
lineage of teachers (guruparvakrama) and the composition of the text
(Pārthasārathimiśra explains this latter sort in his commentary on ŚV
I.23-24: tadyathā brahma prajāpataye mīmāmsām provāca so
'pindrāya so 'py adityāya sa ca vasiṣṭhāya so 'pi parāśarāya parāśa-
raḥ kṛṣṇadvaipāyanāya so 'pi jaiminaye sa ca svopadeśānantaram
imam nyāyam granthe nibaddhavān iti ) and, second, to the type of
sambandha expressed as the relation between, ultimately, two
actions, the former action being the cause of, or leading directly to,
the composing of the sūtra/śāstra (one of the reasons Pārthasārathi-
miśra gives for this type of connection not being appropriate for the
case of the MS is that Jaimini did not compose his text immediately
after studying: na cādhyayanānantaram jaimininā śāstram praṇītam
ato nānena śāstrasambandha ucyate; as examples of possible former
actions he gives previous study, the questioning of a student and the
worship of a deity). The sambandha described in the PSP appears to
resemble the second category of sambandha described: The "action"
of accomplishing the first cittotpada inspired Nāgārjuna, who was
intent on rescuing beings from samsāra, to undertake in service of
this goal the "action" of composing his work.
APPENDICES
The description of a sambandha that is in some respects similar to,
though more extensive than, the one set forth in the PSP can be found
at the beginning of Bhāviveka's PP (cf. PP D 46a1-6; P 54a1-54b2;
Kajiyama 1963: 40-41; Ames 1993: 213-14). Bhāviveka first de-
scribes the Buddha's aeons-long spiritual effort, his realization of the
thusness of dharmas and his subsequent teaching, and then states that
Nāgārjuna, having realized the Tathāgata's doctrine, wishe
compose the śāstra. Avalokitavrata classifies this sambandha, how-
ever, as a rigs pa'i 'brel pa type of sambandha, glossing rigs pa'i
'brel pa with: bla ma brgyud pa (*guruparamparā; he elucidates this
sambandha as it pertains to the PP with: de la dang por bla ma dam
pa sangs rgyas bcom ldan 'das kyi 'byung ba’i rgyu bstan par bya
zhing phyis bstan bcos mdzad pa'i 'byung ba'i rgyu bstan par355
bya'o; cf. PPT D 8b6; P 10a7). Avalokitavrata explains that the
sambandha in the PP is actually twofold in that it also includes a don
gyi 'brel pa (*arthasambandha), which, he states, refers to the
meaning of the parts of the explanation of the rigs pa'i 'brel pa.
Explicit mention of a sambandha is not found in BP, although when
the question as to the purpose (dgos pa) of the teaching of dependent-
arising is posed, Buddhapālita states that Nāgārjuna, compassionate
by nature, seeing beings suffer, wished to show them the real nature
of things (dngos po rnams kyi yang dag pa ji lta ba) so that they could
be released, and thus undertook the teaching of dependent-arising (cf.
BPed 2.16-20).
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Appendix II (re: §2., n. 34)
MABh on karunā and bodhicitta
In the MABh on MA I.2 and I.3, compassion is said to lead to the
emergence of bodhicitta: the compassionate individual becomes
aware of and pained by others' suffering in the world and their plight
in samsāra in general and vows to free all beings from suffering and
to place them in the state of Buddhahood (cf. MABhed 8.5-10; at
MABhed 8.10 this decision of the individual is referred to as a
promise, i.e., dam bca' ba 'di [iyam pratijñā]). Candrakīrti elaborates
on the sambodhicitta mentioned in MA I.1 by way of citing from the
*Āryadharmasamgītisūtra (see MABhed 6.13-7.6), where it is stated
that in the bodhisattva who has come to understand that all things are
adventitious, non-abiding, and the same as the dharmadhātu there
arises the resolve to bring about this same understanding in all
beings, and that this resolve is bodhicitta. According to the sutra, the
bodhisattva's bodhicitta is a state of mind intent on the benefit and
happiness of all beings, tender because of love (byams pa), without
stains owing to equanimity (*upekṣā), unchanging because of empti-
ness (*śūnyatā), without obscuration because it is not involved with
marks/phenomena (*ānimitta), non-abiding because there is nothing
to wish for (*apranihita), etc. The compassion that occurs during the
bodhisattva's experience of non-dual jñāna, i.e., during the medita-
tional experience in which things no longer appear, would be the356
third of the three types of compassion explained toward the beginning
of the MABh (see MABhed 9.4-11.14), namely, compassion without
any object (anālambanā karuṇā; dmigs pa med pa’i snying rje). Both
compassion toward [beings seen as] dharmas and compassion that
does not have an object are described by way of the example of the
moon reflected in water in MA I.4a and its commentary. MABhed
12.15-13.1: de la byang chub sems dpa' ji skad bshad pa'i tshul gyis
'gro ba rang bzhin med par mthong ba snying rje'i khyad par nyid du
nye bar bzung (MABhun: gzung) ba'i sems gang... rab (MABhu: rab
tu) dga' ba zes bya ba’i ming can gnyis su med pa'i ye shes ... de la ni
| dang po zhes bya bar brjod do || (see MABh, 1907: 261). See also
the translations and comments in Huntington 1989: 149f. and
Hopkins 1980: 110-125, 137-149, 182-191.
APPENDICES
tr
For Candrakīrti, the first cittotpada is equivalent to the first bhūmi,
and represents one of ten distinct forms of bodhicitta (cf. MABhed
11.15), although he clarifies in his commentary on MA I.4cd-5ab that
it is the bodhisattva's uncontaminated gnosis (anāsravajñāna; zag pa
med pa'i ye shes) imbued with special compassion and bodhicitta that
is distinguished into "parts," i.e., grounds (bhūmi). Each is called a
bhūmi because it serves as the ground for the qualities ascribed to it.
The individual bhūmis are differentiated according to the qualities,
powers, etc., gained by the developing bodhisattva and are not due to
any differences in the nature of the basis, the anāsravajñāna, itself:
byang chub sems dpa' rnams kyi zag pa med pa'i ye shes snying rje la
sogs pas yongs su zin pa nyid car (MABhun: char) rnam par phye ba
na sa zhes bya ba'i ming 'thob ste yon tan gyi rten du gyur pa'i phyir
'di la rang gi ngo bo'i khyad par gyis byas pa'i dbye ba ni yod
pa ma yin no|| (MABhed 12.1-8; cf. MABh,, 1907: 260f.). The first
bhumi is characterized by the predominance of the quality of
generosity (cf. MA I.9a).
roPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Appendix III (re: §2., n. 38)
nīti
357
The compound prajñāpāramitānīti (shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i
tshul) also occurs in the context of the Yogācāra critique of the
Madhyamaka interpretation of the Prajñāpāramitā texts in MHK V.7:
prajñāpāramitānītir iyam sarvajñatāptaye | na tūtpādanirodhādiprati-
ṣedhaparāyaṇā || (cf. Lindtner 1995: 50; 2001: 59). Eckel (2008: 224)
translates prajñāpāramitānīti as "[t]his approach to the Perfection of
Wisdom," which appears to work in the context of the MHK discus-
sion but probably should not be globally applied to other instances;
Eckel in fact finds it necessary to add “the means” in square brackets
("This approach to the Perfection of Wisdom is [the means] ...").
Hoornaert (1999: 137) does not take into account Lindtner's emend-
ation of the end of MHK V.7d from pratiṣedhaparo nayaḥ to prati-
sedhaparāyaṇā; his translation of niti (and naya) as "doctrine" is
questionable (cf. ibid., 157 and n. 3). Iida (1966: 82; 1980: 80 and
235, n. 27) translates nīti of the same verse with the more etymologi-
cally aware "guiding principle." The compound also occurs in the ini-
tial sentence of the prose text of the PP: slob dpon gyi zhal snga nas
tshig le'ur byas pa dag kho nas... shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i
tshul bka' stsal (D 45b6-7; P 53b7-8). Kajiyama (1963: 40) translates
"die Prinzipien der Vollkommenheit der Einsicht," again a somewhat
questionable translation of nīti given the context; Ames (1993: 213),
assuming that the Sanskrit read prajñāpāramitānaya, translates "the
doctrine (naya) of the perfection of discernment (prajñāpāramitā)."
Avalokitavrata, commenting on the first sentence of the PP,
explicates the individual words of the compound *prajñāpāramitānīti
as follows: de la shes rab ces bya ba ni rab tu 'byed pa'i mtshan nyid
de | gang gis chos rnams rab tu 'byed par byed pa dang | (P: ||) rnam
par 'jog par byed pa de ni shes rab ces bya'o || pha rol tu phyin pa
zhes bya ba ni mi dmigs pa'i mtshan nyid do || pha rol zhes bya ba ni
mi dmigs pa ste shes rab gang mi dmigs pa der phyin cing son pa de
ni shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa zhes bya ste | phyin pa med pa yin
no || tshul zhes bya ba ni shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i tshul te |
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i mtshan nyid kyi chos bstan pa gang
yin pa'o || yang na shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa nyid tshul te | (P: ||)358
gang gis chos thams cad dmigs su med par khrid par byed pa'am |
gang gis gzhan gyi rgyud la don khrid par byed pa'o || yang na gang
gis bsod nams dang ye shes kyi tshogs gzhal du med pa nye bar bsags
pa'i 'jig rten 'khor ba’i btson ra nas bsgral te | bsam pa thams cad
yongs su rdzogs par byed pa'i yid bzhin gyi nor bu rin po che lta bur
khrid par byed pa de ni tshul lo (D 6b4-7; P 7b5-8a2). “There [as
regards Bhäviveka's
Bhāviveka's statement,] 'insight' (*prajñā) has the
characteristic of discrimination (*pravicaya). That by which there is
discrimination and respective determination (*vyavasthapana) of the
dharmas is 'insight.' pāramitā has the characteristic of non-percep-
tion (*anupalabdhi). The other side / the utmost reach (pāra) is non-
perception; the insight which has gone (ita) to, i.e., has arrived at, that
non-perception is prajñāpāramitā; it is [in reality] without going. As
regards the 'method' (*nīti), it is the method of the prajñāpāramitā,
[i.e.,] the instruction in the dharma which has the characteristic of the
insight that has gone to the other side (prajñāpāramitā). Alterna-
tively, precisely the prajñāpāramita is the method; it is that which
leads/guides to the non-perception of all dharmas, or that which leads
[i.e., conveys] benefit with regard to the continuum of others. Or, it is
the method inasmuch as it [i.e., the prajñāpāramitā] leads, once it has
liberated [those] people who have collected the immeasurable
accumulations of merit and gnosis from the jail of samsāra, like a
wish-fulfilling jewel that perfectly accomplishes all wishes." See also
Vetter 2001 where prajñāpāramitā as a method is discussed.
APPENDICES
Appendix IV (re: §5., n. 47)
Explanation of nirodha, etc., in PsP Tib
The word tatra that begins the second sentence in PsPM §5 is in all the
Sanskrit manuscripts followed by an explanation of the meaning of
the eight elements to be negated in regard to pratītyasamutpāda,
namely, nirodha up to and including nirgama. In PsP Tib the explan-
ation of the meanings of these eight elements is not attested after the
translation for avayavārthas tu vibhajyate | tatra, and is found only
further on in the text, after the translation of the sentence sa evedānīm
sāmvṛtaḥ pratītyasamutpādaḥ svabhāvenānutpānnatvād āryajñānāpe-PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
359
kṣayā nāsmin nirodho vidyate yāvan nāsmin nirgamo vidyata ity
anirodhādibhir aṣṭābhir viseṣaṇair visisyate (PSPM §15 [= PsP₁ 10.13-
11.2]); cf. PSP Tib $5b within PsP Tib $15. That is, the word
explanation appears two sentences after Candrakīrti winds up his
criticism of Bhāviveka's attempted reiteration of others' etymologies
and his own understanding of the meaning of the compound pratītya-
samutpāda with the stock phrase ity alam prasangena. The sentence
yathā ca nirodhādayo na santi pratītyasamutpādasya tathā sakalena
śāstreṇa pratipadayisyati, which in the manuscripts immediately
follows the sentence commencing sa evedānīm sāmvrtaḥ, appears in
PSP Tib only after the explanation of nirodha, etc.
There is no reason to assume that either Pa tshab and Mahasumati's
Kashmiri manuscript or the manuscript relied on by Pa tshab and Ka-
nakavarman in Lhasa for the revision of the translation of the PSP
attested the word-explanation block only after the discussion of the
compound pratītyasamutpāda. Pa tshab and Mahasumati relocated the
block to the point it is found in the Tibetan translation because rten
cing 'brel par 'byung appears before 'gag pa med pa, etc., in the Ti-
betan translation of the homage verses. The translators obviously de-
cided that it would only be logical to explain the verse elements ac-
cording to the order in which they appear in the PsP Tib verses:
homage verse Iab in PsP Skt reads: anirodham anutpādam anucche-
dam aśāśvatam, whereas homage verse lab in PsP Tib reads: gang gis
rten cing 'brel par 'byung 'gag pa med pa skye med pa, which would
correspond to the syntactical order yaḥ pratītyasamutpādam aniro-
dham anutpādam. The translators have fitted the explanation of niro-
dha, etc., quite inconspicuously between the two sentences later in the
text in which nirodha and the other elements to be negated in regard
to pratītyasamutpāda are again referred to.
It might be suggested that one of the manuscripts used by the trans-
lators did attest the block explaining nirodha, etc., after the discussion
of the compound pratītyasamutpāda because it is possible that
Candrakīrti is following the structure of Bhāviveka's presentation of
the section as we find it in PP Tib, in which the words 'gag pa, etc.,
are explained only subsequent to the discussion of the compound rten
cing 'brel par 'byung (ba). This location of the explanation of 'gag360
pa, etc., in PP Tib, however, is almost certainly again the result of a
translator decision: Jñānagarbha and Klu’i rgyal mtshan, the trans-
lators of the PP, moved the PP explanations of yaḥ and pratītya-
samutpāda forward in the text so that the verse elements could be
explicated in accord with the order they appear in the Tibetan homage
verses. It can be observed that Bhāviveka unambiguously asserts in
what appears to have originally been part of an introductory state-
ment—that the meanings of the words are stated (by himself) “right at
the beginning" (de la tshig gi don [*padārtha] rtogs pa med par ngag
dang rab tu byed pa dang bstan bcos kyi don mi rtogs pas de'i phyir
dang po kho nar tshig gi don brjod par bya'o [D 47a2-3; P 55b2-3]),
and yet his explanation of gang gis (yaḥ) and his comments on rten
cing 'brel par 'byung (ba), i.e., the explanations of the first two ele-
ments of the translated homage verses, precede this statement. More-
over, Bhāviveka's comment that the individual words are explained
"right at the beginning" is followed by the explication of each of the
verses' words excepting yaḥ and pratītyasamutpāda, which are con-
spicuously absent here because they have already been commented on
in PP Tib in the order they occur in the Tibetan translation.
Although I have not examined the PP carefully enough to be able to
determine the exact seams of the presumed cut and paste work of the
translators, the structure of PP Tib strongly suggests that in PP Skt
the explanations of yaḥ and pratītyasamutpāda appeared within the
main word-explanation block corresponding to the order in which
they appear in the Sanskrit homage verses. Given that the PP trans-
lators also translated PPT, they must have rearranged PPT too; there
may be clearer indications of the seams of the moved block within
PPT.
APPENDICES
The mention of the words avayavārtha and vibhajyate also do not
support PSP Tib's placement of the block. It might be proposed that
avayavārtha and vibhajyate are intended to be related not to the
homage verses but to pratītyasamutpāda; that is, the meanings of
these two words would restrict them to referring to an analysis (vi
√bhaj) of the meaning of the individual parts (avayavārtha) of the
compound pratītyasamutpāda. Other documented occurrences of the
compounds avayavārtha and samudāya forming a complementary
pair (cf. the first two examples given for samudāya in Abhyankar and361
Shukla 1977: 418) and the fact that vibhajyate has, in addition to
meanings such as “is analyzed,” the meaning “is explained in detail"
(see BHSD) tend to undermine such a hypothesis. Although one does
encounter in Candrakīrti's rebuttal of Bhāviveka's preferred interpre-
tation of the compound pratītyasamutpāda the statement that the com-
pound pratītyasamutpāda is avayavārthānugama (cf. PsPM §13), i.e.,
one that corresponds to the meaning of its members, it seems clear
that the exact sense of avayavārtha is dependent upon the context: in
§13 it refers to the meaning of the avayavas of a compound but in the
present case to the avayavas of sentences/verses. Candrakīrti's use of
the word tu in avayavārthas tu vibhajyate following the homage
verses in fact indicates that at this point he intends avayavārtha to
stand in contradistinction to samudāyārtha.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
That the word-explanation block has been relocated in PsP Tib and
PP Tib was overlooked by Pandeya when he "reconstructed" PP
Sanskrit; he reconstructs the passages under discussion following the
Tibetan order of things (see Pandeya 1988: 6). Extremely surprising
is the fact that, even though Pandeya sets PsP's Sanskrit version of
the homage verses at the beginning of his reconstruction of the PP, he
does not take this version into consideration when they reappear a
few lines later, but reconstructs directly from the Tibetan, with the
result that homage verse Iab there reads yaḥ pratītya samutpādam
anirodham anutpādam. De Jong (1993) has critically reviewed
Pandeya's two volumes (concluding that "the only usefulness of
Pandeya's work is in making clear that this is not the way to proceed"
[ibid., 146]) but not does mention this problem.
Appendix V (re: §6., n. 53)
upasarga
The Tattvabodhinī, which claims that upasargas are merely illumin-
ators, presents, without any change to the metre of the sloka, pādas ab
as: upasargeņa dhātvartho balād anyaḥ pratīyate "Another meaning
of the [verbal] root is perforce understood by means of the prefix"
(cf. SiKau 405). Bhairavamiśra, in his Candrakalā, discusses the three362
APPENDICES
readings for pādas ab (405). He first gives expression to the opinion
that dhātvartho balāt as presented in the Tattvabodhinī version of the
śloka should be read as abalāt (dhātvartho 'balāt), because otherwise
the fact that upasargas are illuminators is contradicted; they would
have to be seen as words in themselves if their strength is mentioned
here. He then notes that certain persons reject the reading upasargeṇa
dhātvartho balād anyatra nīyate (i.e., that found in the PsP) for the
reading upasargena dhatvartho balād anyah pratīyate (i.e., that found
in the Tattvabodhini) on the ground that if the upasarga is accepted as
the agent of "leading," its independence and the verbal root's depend-
ence would be implied, neither of which is asserted in the view of
those who hold that upasargas are merely illuminators (nayanakartṛ-
tvasyopasarga evangīkāre balābhāve 'svatantratve ca kartṛtvam naiva
drstacaram iti nayanakarmaṇa evāsvatantratvasya sarvatrangīkārād
dhātāv asvatantratvam upasargeșu svatantratvam iti viparītam eva
syāt). According to them, balāt must refer to the strength of the root,
not of the upasarga, and the coalescence of the root with an upasarga
merely sparks, so to speak, the potency of the root for assuming and
conveying a new meaning. The first half of the sloka is explained to
mean: upasargeṇa [=] upasargasamsargena "through the coalescence
with a prefix" balāt [=] śabdaśaktisvabhāvāt "because of the nature of
the potency of the word (= verbal root)” anya eva dhātvarthaḥ pratī-
yate. Bhairavamiśra ends the presentation of views by adding that
even with the reading anyatra nīyate, the upasarga should be seen as
(only) instigating the making known of a different meaning of the
root; thus here too the meaning is reconciled to support the view of
upasarga as illuminator.
Appendix VI (re: §9., n. 75)
etac cayuktam
De La Vallée Poussin presents the Sanskrit text for Bhāviveka's
critique as commencing with etad vā [a]yuktam kim ca ayuktam etat,
and punctuates it with a half-daṇḍa after [a]yuktam. All of the paper
manuscripts attest variants of etad vayuktam kim ca ayuktam etat for
etad cāyuktam (the akṣara dvā in etad vā° of ms J closely resembles363
the akṣara ccā). The correct reading etac cāyuktam is attested only by
ms Q (ms P has a lacuna). Approximately 12-13 akṣaras are missing
in ms P's lacuna that begins after the akṣara kau of anuvādākauśalam
and extends to, but does not include, the aksara ca of cakṣuḥ; there is
definitely not enough space for the 18-19 akṣaras one would expect
were ms P to have read as the paper manuscripts (and de La Vallée
Poussin's edition) do. De La Vallée Poussin (PsP₁ 8, n. 6) assesses
that PSP Tib lacks etad vā [a]yuktam kim ca but does not suggest
further emendation of the Sanskrit text. PsP Tib for the (full) sentence
in question reads de yang mi rung ste mig dang gzugs la brten nas mig
gi rnam par shes pa 'byung zhes gsungs pa 'di la don gnyi ga med
pa'i phyir ro zhes sun 'byin smras pa gang yin pa de yang mi thad
do. The citation as presented in PsP Tib, which represents Bhävive-
ka's critique of the two etymologies for pratītyasamutpāda, has been
taken over nearly verbatim from PP Tib: de yang mi rung ste| mig
dang gzugs rnams la brten nas mig gi rnam par shes pa 'byung ngo
zhes gsungs pa 'di la don gnyi ga med pa'i phyir ro (PP D 46b3-4; P
54b8-55a1). Note Bhāviveka's employment of *etat (Tib: de) which
refers back to the pair of etymologies just presented. PP Tib's de
yang mi rung ste indicates an original reading *etac cāyuktam in PP
Skt. Since Candrakīrti is obviously quoting PP Skt, Ms Q's etac
cāyuktam can be accepted as correct (a conclusion also supported by
the size of P's lacuna); the additional words kim ca ayuktam etat that
follow in the paper manuscripts must be an accretion. etac cāyuktam
in the PSP thus marks the commencement of the PP quotation (the
paper manuscripts' reading etad väyuktam is the result of the aksara
ccă read as dvā); api of yad uktam dūṣaṇam tad api nopapadyate
makes clear that we are now into Candrakīrti's second criticism.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Stcherbatsky (1927: 88, n. 2) emended de La Vallée Poussin's read-
ing etad vā [a]yuktam kim ca ayuktam etat to etac cāyuktam kim ca
ayuktam etat; his literal translation for this and what follows runs,
"And this is wrong (on the part of Bhāvaviveka. He says,) ‘and more-
over it is not right to maintain that in relation to (= in reaching) the
eye and the colours, visual sensation arises, because two things
(reaching one another are here) impossible.' Just the incriminated
fault is nonsense." Although Stcherbatsky's misinterpretation of the
meaning of the section must have influenced his understanding of the364
APPENDICES
intended relation of the semantic components, it is clear that he takes
etac cāyuktam to be Candrakīrti's introductory statement to the next
fault of Bhāviveka's to be pointed out and kim ca ayuktam etat to
constitute the commencement of Bhāviveka's criticism, that is, he
understands kim ca ayuktam etat to be the Sanskrit for de yang mi
rung.
As stated in the note to my translation, the *LT cites exactly the PSP
text passage under discussion: anūdya bhāviveko dūṣaṇam āha etac
cāyuktam iti (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 121, 130). See also Kajiyama 1963:
42 and Ames 1993: 215, both of whom have understood Bhāviveka's
dūṣaṇa in the PP correctly (Ames translates PP Tib's yang [standing
for Skt ca in its adversative sense] of de yang mi rung as "also").
Appendix VII (re: §23., n. 121)
paroktadoṣāparihārāc ca
None of the PsP manuscripts attest a ca after paroktadoṣāparihārāt,
but PSP Tib, PP (more so PP Peking than Derge), and PPT appear to
confirm that one was included in the original Skt of PP and PsP. It is
not uncommon for the lower ca of the akṣara cca, as a result of re-
peated copying, to end up a small blur and thus to be dropped, or for
the akṣara to be interpreted as t plus virāma; in the former case the
upper part of the akṣara is often interpreted as a slightly distorted ta
and is left to stand as such, or a virāma is added to it. It should be
noted that mss P and Q, less generous with daṇḍas than the paper
manuscripts, place a danda after paroktadoṣāparihārāt (they addi-
tionally place a danda after hetudṛṣṭāntānabhidhānāt; the paper
manuscripts place a double daṇḍa after it). prasangavākyatvāc ca
thus commences a new sentence.
PSP Tib reads gtan tshigs dang dpe ma brjod pa'i phyir dang | gzhan
gyis smras pa'i nyes pa ma bsal ba'i phyir ro || thal bar 'gyur ba’i
tshig yin pa'i phyir ... . Although the Peking and Derge translations of
this section of PP diverge, both also appear to support inclusion of ca
(as will be seen further on in the PsP, however, PsP Tib often addsPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
365
dangs where PsP Skt correctly does not attest cas; PP D could
also be taken as reflecting a list of three reasons connected by a single
final ca). The corresponding section of PP P reads: gtan tshigs dang
dpe ma brjod pa'i phyir dang gzhan gyis smras pa'i nyes pa ma bsal
ba'i phyir ro || (= PsP Tib) glags yod pa'i tshig yin pa'i phyir te ...
(58b8-59a1). PP D reads: gtan tshigs dang dpe ma brjod pa'i phyir
dang gzhan gyis smras pa'i nyes pa ma bsal ba'i phyir dang | glags
yod pa'i tshig yin pa'i phyir te... (49a6-7). Given that Peking tends to
preserve original readings, I consider PP P to better reflect Bhāvi-
veka's original Sanskrit (against Yotsuya 1999: 76). It is doubtful that
PP D's second dang reflects a consciously chosen translation of ca of
prasangavākyatvāc ca as found in the PP citation in PsP Skt, for such
cas are normally translated by yang; I expect that PP D originally
read as PP P and that dang was-in the absence of an unambiguous
equivalent for ca heralding the stating of a third reason (I admit that
te could have stood for ca)-added as an editorial improve-
ment/clarification.
Most helpful is the fact that Avalokitavrata comments on the word ca
(yang) occurring after prasangavākyatvāc; this confirms that this ca
as found in PSP Skt (but lacking in PsP Tib and PP Tib) also stood in
PP Skt. Note too that PPT's quotation of Bhāviveka's critique also
contains this yang, and that the first two criticisms, as in PsP Tib and
PP Peking, are presented as a separate unit (gtan tshigs dang dpe ma
brjod pa'i phyir dang | gzhan gyis smras pa'i nyes pa ma bsal ba’i
phyir ro || glags yod pa’i tshig yin pa’i yang phyir te | skabs kyi don las
bzlog pas...
[PPT D 73b3-4; P 85b8-86a1]). Avalokitavrata states that
this ca indicates that a third fault is being stated. That he deems it
necessary to comment on ca after prasangavākyatvāc as indicating
yet another criticism of Buddhapalita's statement probably shows that
he wanted to point out that the three ablatives indicate three reasons
of equal weight/status. Thus, even though this ca is a mere sentence
connector (i.e., with it a new sentence starts) that does not connect the
reason itself with the two previous reasons, he wanted to indicate that
the reason in the sentence it introduces is on a par with the two
others. PPT: gzhan yang de ji ltar rigs pa ma yin zhe na glags yod
pa'i tshig yin pa'i yang phyir te gnas brtan buddha pā li tas bshad pa
1
(D: rnam par bshad pa) de ni rgol ba gzhan gyi klan ka’i glags yod366
pa'i tshig yin pa'i phyir yang rigs pa ma yin no || yang zhes bya ba’i
sgra ni gtan tshigs dang dpe ma brjod pa'i phyir dang gzhan gyis
smras pa'i nyes pa ma bsal ba'i phyir rigs pa ma yin par (D: pa) 'ba'
zhig tu ma zad kyi | de ni glags yod pa'i tshig yin pa'i phyir yang rigs
pa ma yin no zhes bya bar sbyar ro (D 74a2-3; P 86a7-86b1; quoted
in Seyfort Ruegg 1981: 64, n. 203). Avalokitavrata's commentary is
translated in Hopkins 1983: 462-466. Hopkins (ibid., 819, n. 375)
notes that Tsong kha pa points out that the translations of the begin-
ning of the third criticism vary, "indicating that he favors glags yod
pa'i tshig yin pa'i yang phyir te as it is in the edition of Bhāvaviveka
he had before him and in Avalokitavrata in the sense of meaning,
'[Buddhapalita's interpretation] is also unsuitable because of having
words that afford an opportunity [to an opponent to expose
contradiction within his own system].""
APPENDICES
The emended PsP Skt would thus, if we disregard for the moment the
difference between the translations thal bar 'gyur ba'i tshig and glags
yod pa'i tshig, appear to mirror the structure of the original PP Skt.
Ames (1993: 222) appears to translate this part of the PP following
Peking and therefore adds "also" in square brackets: "That is not [lo-
gically] possible, because no reason and example are given and be-
cause faults stated by the opponent are not answered. [Also,] because
it is a prasanga-argument, a [property] to be proved ..." (cf. as well
Kajiyama's translation based on Walleser's edition of the PP which
likewise follows PP Peking [Kajiyama 1963: 50]). Yotsuya (1999:
76), on the other hand, chose to translate following Derge: "This is
incorrect, because neither a logical reason (gtan tshigs, hetu) nor a
logical example (dpe, dṛṣṭānta) has been presented. Nor has the fault
(ñes pa, doṣa) pointed out by [your] opponent (= the Sāmkhya) been
eliminated. Furthermore [it is unacceptable] because it is a statement
which is open to an objection. Since by the reversal of the matter
under discussion ….. .'
99PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
367
Appendix VIII (re: §27., n. 140)
kāryātmakaḥ and kāraṇātmakaḥ
De La Vallée Poussin emended the masculine singular nominative
forms kāryātmaka and kāraṇātmaka of the Sankhya objection (kā-
ryātmakaḥ, kāraṇātmaka, kāryātmakaś, kāraṇātmakas) that he found
in his manuscripts to their corresponding ablative forms because PSP
Tib's bras bu'i bdag nyid las (for PsP Skt's kāryātmakaḥ and kā-
ryātmakas) and rgyu'i bdag nyid las (for PsP Skt's kāraṇātmaka and
kāraṇātmakas) appeared to be reflecting ablatives. Although the
masculine singular nominative forms are also attested in de Jong's
manuscript (my ms D) and in the three manuscripts Yotsuya
consulted, neither de Jong nor Yotsuya called de La Vallée Poussin's
emendations into question, almost certainly because they too were of
the opinion that PSP Tib's presentation of translations for Sanskrit
ablatives, and not nominatives, justified the emendations. No doubt
further justification was seen in the fact that the (nonextant) PP Skt,
from which Candrakīrti is citing the objection, was assumed to have
attested ablatives since PP Tib likewise contains translations for
ablative forms. It has thus seemed reasonable, on the basis of the
evidence provided by the Tibetan translations, to view the PsP Skt
manuscript readings as corrupt. Disturbing, however, is the
appearance of the nominative forms even in ms P, and the difficulty
one has in explaining the causes of the supposed corruption.
It is imperative to note that as in the other cases in which Candrakīrti
is citing from external works, the translators of PsP Tib have not
translated directly from PsP Skt but have copied the citation from the
Tibetan translation of the source text, in the present case from PP Tib.
PSP Tib thus reflects PP Tib but is not necessarily a trustworthy
witness for PSP Skt.
It appears that the PsP's change in language, i.e., from the PP's
ablatives to PsP's nominatives, reflects a shift in what is being taken
as the subject that arises, or rather, that is negated as arising. In the
pertinent texts, the subject is either the effect (said to arise from itself
as its cause), or the cause (said to arise again as its own effect). The
ambivalence may already be present in Buddhapālita's argument. His368
APPENDICES
consequence na svata utpadyante bhāvās tadutpādavaiyarthyāt would
seem to take things as effects (bhāvas) as the subject and to negate
their arising from themselves (as their own cause) because their (i.e.,
the bhāvas' = the effects') arising would be superfluous. In his ex-
planatory statement na hi svātmanā vidyamānānāṁ padārthānām pu-
narutpāde prayojanam asti, on the other hand, the situation appears to
be reversed: Buddhapālita states that it is futile for things already
existing as such (i.e., things as cause) to arise again. An explicit dis-
tinction between things as effects and things as causes is, however,
not made by Buddhapālita; he merely refers to things in general.
Bhāviveka and Candrakīrti, on the other hand, clearly distinguish the
subject that arises as either an effect or a cause. Bhāviveka, who sets
forth "the inner bases have not arisen from self" as his thesis
(nādhyātmikāny ayatanāni svata utpannāni), takes things as effects,
i.e., the (arisen) inner bases, as the subject. Candrakīrti, by contrast,
takes things as causes as the subject. That his subject of arising is
things as causes is supported by his comments later on: at PsPM §29
(PSP₁ 21.1-6; see especially 21.3), with his mention of pots and so
forth that already exist in a latent state in a lump of clay, etc., he
refers to the subject (i.e., locus) of the other-acknowledged inference
he draws out of Buddhapalita's statement of unwanted consequence;
in PSPM $30 (PsP₁ 21.8-12; especially 21.10), he makes explicit that
what is to be negated as arising are things with a "non-manifest form"
(anabhivyaktarūpa); and in PsPM §31 (PSP₁ 22.1-2), he clarifies that
the pakṣa of the other-acknowledged inference comprises "all things
disposed to arise" (niravaseṣotpitsupadārtha).
L
L
L
The two different subjects of arising are respectively alluded to with
the ablative and nominative forms of the Sankhyas' alternatives. Be-
cause the Madhyamaka argument denying the arising of things
focusses on the Sankhyas' alleged cause of things (svataḥ), the
Sankhyas demand that the Madhyamika provide a more precise de-
scription of this cause, namely, as one that has the nature of an effect
or one that has the nature of a cause. Thus when Bhāviveka, for
whom arisen effects are the subject, is addressed, the Sankhyas will
ask from what type of cause the effects are denied as having arisen.
Since Candrakīrti's subject of arising is (already) causes, the
Sankhyas will ask what type of cause is denied as reproducing itself.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
369
Candrakīrti therefore modifies PP Skt's *kāryātmakāt and *kāra-
ṇātmakāt to their nominative forms because he has shifted the subject
that arises from things as effects to things as causes. To summarize
the questions posed: Inasmuch as PP Skt, PP Tib and PsP Tib take the
effect as the subject (i.e., the inner bases), their Sānkhyas will be
asking whether Bhāviveka intends to deny that an effect has arisen
from itself as an effect or intends to deny that an effect has arisen
from itself as a cause. In PsP Skt, the Sankhyas are asking whether
the intention is to deny that a cause in the state of an effect repro-
duces itself or if it is to deny that a cause in the state of a cause repro-
duces itself.
Awareness of the different perspectives regarding the subject of
arising exposes a problem introduced by de La Vallée Poussin's
emendation of the nominatives to ablatives. In the final sentence of
the Sankhya objection in PsP Skt, it is argued that if the Madhyamika
denies that something with the nature of a cause reproduces itself, the
Madhyamika's reason will be contradictory (viruddhārthatā), i.e.,
will prove the sadhya's opposite, on account of the fact that “all that
arises arises only as something existing with the nature of a cause"
(kāraṇātmanā vidyamānasyaiva sarvasyotpattimata utpādāt). The
subject of arising implied by the sentence is clearly as Candrakīrti
takes it to be, i.e., things as causes. This reason given by the San-
khyas to demonstrate that the Mādhyamika's reason is contradictory
appears in PP Tib as skye ba can thams cad ni rgyu'i bdag nyid du
yod pa kho na las skye ba'i phyir "because all that arises arises only
from something that exists with the nature of a cause"; PP Skt may
have read *kāraṇātmanā vidyamānād eva.... The subject of arising
that is implied in this case is Bhāviveka's, viz., things as effects. The
allusion to effects as the subject of arising is thus consistent
throughout the PP objection. PsP Tib, however, presents the Sankhya
reason indicating the contradiction as skye ba dang ldan pa thams cad
ni rgyu'i bdag nyid du yod pa kho na skye ba'i phyir. The relevant
difference from PP Tib is the lack of a las after rgyu'i bdag nyid du
yod pa kho na. The phrase without las brings an unexpected and un-
acceptable inconsistency to PSP Tib's Sankhya objection as a whole:
in reproducing PP Tib's objection up to this point, PsP Tib takes
things as effects as the subject of arising, but with the reason showing370
the contradiction, it takes the subject of arising as Candrakīrti does,
i.e., as things as causes. This switch in PsP Tib of the subject of
arising from effects to causes points to an oversight on the part of the
translators. Following their regular procedure for citations, they
copied PP Tib's objection into PsP Tib and made their usual minor
modifications to the ready-made translation. For the sake of having
PSP Tib better reflect PsP Skt's phrase indicating the reason for the
contradiction, they dropped PP Tib's las, but did not notice that this
brought an inconsistency into the text of the objection. The same
inconsistency regarding the subject of arising that mars PSP Tib is
introduced into PsP Skt when the four nominatives are changed to
ablatives. Candrakīrti's inclusion of and modification of the PP Skt
Sankhya objection was obviously motivated by his concern with
demonstrating that the other-acknowledged inference he draws out of
Buddhapālita's statement cannot be faulted by the Sānkhyas (cf. PSPM
§30; PSP₁ 21.8-12). A mere recitation of the PP Sankhya complaint
did not serve his purposes; he reconstructed the PP objection so that it
could be seen as applicable to his own other-acknowledged inference.
L
APPENDICES
Yonezawa (2005a: 72, n. 25) has adverted to the fact that ms Q does
not bear the nominative forms kāryātmakaḥ and kāraṇātmakaḥ but
rather attests the ablative forms kāryātmanaḥ and kāraṇātmanaḥ.
Given that ms Q's Sanskrit ablatives correspond to PsP Tib's abla-
tives, Yonezawa expressed the opinion that these ablatives represent
correct readings and that they should be adopted as such in the text of
PSP Skt. As appealing as it might be to accept ms Q's ablatives and as
tempting as it might be to want to explain the other manuscripts'
readings as resulting from the interpretation of na akṣaras as ka
akaras, ms Q's readings cannot be accepted for exactly the same
reasons that PsP₁'s ablatives cannot be accepted. First, the PP's
Sankhya argument was simply copied into PsP Tib from PP Tib and
therefore cannot serve as a reliable witness for PsP Skt. Second, ms
Q's ablatives together with the PsP's genitive vidyamānasya (kāra-
ṇātmanā vidyamānasyaiva sarvasyotpattimata utpādāt) ruin the logic-
al coherence of the Sankhya argument in the PsP, and are problematic
in view of Candrakīrti's other-acknowledged inference at PSPM $29
and $30 (PSP₁ 21.1-6, 8-12) and his clarification of the paksa at PSPM
§31 (PSP₁ 22.1-2). I expect that ms Q's ablatives are the result of de-PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
371
liberate change: an individual involved at some stage in the trans-
mission lineage of ms Q (the readings may have come from the y line
[see Stemma]) simplified the lectio difficilior kāryātmakaḥ and kāra-
ṇātmakaḥ, possibly because the sentence read with the ablative is at
least on a superficial reading-immediately pleasing and easy to
understand, or because it was noticed that the Sankhya argument in
the PP contained ablatives. As indicated, the nominatives kāryātma-
kaḥ and kāraṇātmakaḥ are the only logically justifiable readings.
Appendix IX (re: §28., n. 148)
codanayā
L
De La Vallée Poussin (PSP, 18 and n. 8) accepts the reading coda-
nayā of his Cambridge and Calcutta manuscripts (Paris reads
vodanayā) but, referring to PSP₁ 21.13 ('numāna[vi]rodhacoda-
nāyām; end of PSPM §30 'numānabādhācodanāyām), appends, “Peut-
être: codanāyām svata ." The entire PsP Tib phrase for PsP Skt
beginning parapratijñāyas tu, etc., reads gzhan gyi dam bca' ba la
rang gi rjes su dpag pas 'gal ba brjod par ni bya dgos pas rang nyid
|
la phyogs la sogs pa (P adds dang) phyogs dang gtan tshigs dang (D
omits dang) dpe'i skyon dang bral ba dag yod par bya dgos so ||,
suggesting that some form of optative participle stood in place of
°codanaya in at least one of the Sanskrit manuscripts from which the
Tibetan translation was made. De La Vallée Poussin (PSP₁ 18, n. 7)
reconstructs gzhan gyi dam bca' ba la rang gi rjes su dpag pas ’gal ba
brjod par ni bya dgos pas as parapratijñāyām sva-anumānena
virodha[sya] abhidhānenaiva bhavitavyam. Regardless of the discrep-
ancy between PsP Skt and PsP Tib, the Sanskrit's codanayā,
construed with bhavitavyam, suits both the structure and intention of
the sentence as a whole, as attested by Yotsuya's (1999: 64) transla-
tion. Like de La Vallée Poussin's manuscripts, the other paper manu-
scripts attest ᵒcodanayā or variants thereof (vodanayā, °codanamā,
°cothadanayā); ms P also attests ᵒcodanayā. Both ms Q and the *LȚ,
however, attest de La Vallée Poussin's suggested °codanāyām (cf.
Yonezawa 2005a: 59 and Yonezawa 2004: 121; in both articles372
APPENDICES
Yonezawa suggests adopting the reading. *LT: anumānena virodha-
codanāyāṇ tasyānumānasya pakṣādibhir bhāvyam). Even though
both of these valuable manuscripts attest codanāyām, the reading can-
not be accepted inasmuch as it disturbs the obviously intended.
symmetry between the components of the two parts of the sentence,
namely, between proof and refutation by way of a reasoning whose
subject, etc., is established for both parties (ubhayasiddhena) being
conceded as inappropriate (mā bhūt), on the one hand, and criticism
of contradiction with a reasoning accepted by the opponent alone by
way of a pakṣa, etc., from the opponent's point of view alone (svata
eva), being demanded (bhavitavyam) in their place, on the other. The
ms Q and *LT reading becomes definitively disqualified when the
line of argumentation in the PSP is regarded, for codanāyām brings
with it the implication that the Madhyamika addressed by Candra-
kīrti's Bhāviveka does indeed, of his own accord, criticize the
opponent's pratijñā by way of a svata evānumāna and needs merely
to be reminded that this anumāna must have a faultless pakṣa, etc., an
implication in no way supported by the text preceding the sentence;
the svata evānumāna drawn out of Buddhapalita's prasanga in the
section following the sentence under discussion represents merely
Candrakīrti's concession to the demand for a svata evānumāna. *LT's
author may have chosen to read codanāyām because he has misunder-
stood the previous part of the sentence as stating that it is correct for
the Mādhyamika to refute the opponent's thesis by way of a reason-
ing established for both parties and has not managed to distinguish
between an ubhayasiddhānumāna and a svata evānumāna (see n. 145,
148, 151). Given that there are other instances of deliberate change in
the PSP text of ms Q, one suspects that its codanāyām is also the
result of misguided reflection on the part of a reader or scribe.
Note that the form codanāyām (of 'numānabādhācodanāyām api at
the end of PSPM $30 [PSPL 21.13]) in the sentence "Therefore, even
when [we accede to Bhāviveka's demand and] there is the criticism
(codanā) that there is sublation [of the Sankhya thesis] by way of an
inference (anumānabādhā) from [the Sankhya's] own point of view"
is used only after Candrakīrti has acquiesced to Bhāviveka's insist-
tence that a svata evānumāna is required and has presented the full
inference inherent in Buddhapalita's statement.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
373
PSP Tib's brjod par ni bya dgos pas, considered by de La Vallée
Poussin as reflecting abhidhānenaiva bhavitavyam, could alternative-
ly be conjectured as the translation for codyatayā. Although codya-
tayā, like codanāyām, detracts from the sentence's intended sym-
metry and tends to muffle the specific demand being made, and thus
cannot be accepted as the original reading, it may represent a corrupt-
tion of codanayā which stood in one of the manuscripts utilized by
the translators of the Tibetan, the result of an added vertical stroke or
natural mark on the leaf to the right of da which caused it to be read
as dya, and the akṣara na appearing similar to and thus read as ta.
The particle ni, however, would seem to speak against such a
reconstruction. It may be more likely that the translators found °coda-
nayā in their exemplars and, having construed pakṣādibhiḥ with
bhavitavyam, felt forced to understand instrumental codanaya as in-
dicating a reason, but were also following the argumentation in the
text closely enough to recognize that criticism by way of a svata
evānumāna was not being presumed, but was rather being demanded,
by Bhäviveka, and therefore considered it necessary to add an
interpreted optative.
Tillemans (1992: 318, n. 8), quoting Stcherbatsky's (1927: 98)
interpretation of svata eva of the latter half of the sentence ("However
in accusing your opponent of contradiction you must yourself take
your stand upon an argument which, in your opinion, would be free of
those logical errors to which a thesis, a reason or an example are
liable” (Tillemans' italics), rightly corrects Stcherbatsky's mistaken
interpretation of svata eva in his translation, "However, since one
accuses the opponent's thesis of being in contradiction with inference
from his point of view alone, then, for himself alone, the thesis and
other [members of this inference] must be free of faults concerning
the thesis, reason and examples." Still, for the reasons stated above,
the translation remains wanting: Candrakīrti's hypothetical oppon-
ent-Bhäviveka is insisting, against mere prasanga usage, on criti-
cism effected by way of an inference whose members are established
for the opponent; he is not, as Tilleman's translation would have it,
automatically assuming such an inference and insisting that its mem-
bers, from the opponent's point of view, be free of fault. The bhavita-
vyam construction has additionally been misunderstood: the grammat-374
ical subject of bhavitavyam, if (erroneously) not taken to be
codanayā, could only be pakṣādibhiḥ, and construed with pakṣādibhiḥ
it would yield the sense "there must be a thesis, etc."; the preceding
pakṣahetudṛṣṭāntadoṣarahitaiḥ (as found in PsP₁) modifies pakṣādi-
bhiḥ, and cannot be taken together with bhavitavyam as forming the
predicate to a logical subject assumed to be pakṣādi.
APPENDICES
Appendix X (re: §71., n. 303)
utpādād vā tathāgatānām anutpăādād vā tathāgatānām sthitaivaiṣā
dharmāṇām dharmatā
The citation is found at AKBhed 137.18: utpādād vā tathāgatānām
anutpādād vā sthitaiveyam dharmateti (Yaśomitra adds tathāgatānām
after anutpādād vā; de La Vallée Poussin [1913a: 111] conjectures
[dharmāṇām] after sthitaiveyam for the AKVy reading); for its
source, parallels and references, see Pāsādika 1989: 59. See also PSP₁
40, n. 1; La Vallée Poussin 1913a: 111-113 (note also the reference to
its use in the AN in regard to the impermanence of conditioned
things); Schoening 1995: 268 and 702. Cp. SN II.25.17-20, where the
statement is made with reference to 12-limbed dependent-arising: jā-
tipaccayā bhikkhave jarāmaraṇam uppādā vā tathāgatānam anu-
ppādā vā tathāgatānam || thitā va să dhātu dhammatthitată dhamma-
niyāmatā idappaccayatā. The formulaic expression also occurs in
Mahāyāna texts, and here tends to refer to the fact that all things are
empty. Cp. Daśabhūmikasūtra (ed. P.L. Vaidya, Darbhanga: The
Mithila Institute, 1967) 43.9-10: api tu khalu punaḥ kulaputra eṣā
sarvadharmāṇām dharmatā utpādād vā tathāgatānām anutpādād vā
sthitaivaișă dharmată dharmadhātusthitiḥ yad idam sarvadharma-
śūnyatā sarvadharmanupalabdhiḥ |. Cp. also the formula as found at
MABhed 306.1-3 where it is cited in response to the question of
whether a non-artificial (*akṛtrima), independent (*nirapekṣa) own-
being exists; see Tauscher 1981: 69-71 and 130, n. 138. Candrakīrti,
speaking in regard to this passage, explains the dharmatā as being
that which is known by consciousness free of the timira of ignorance
(cf. MABhed 306.4-8). Reference within the formulaic expression toPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
375
the paramārtha, instead of to the dharmatā, is found within a sūtra
quotation at MABhed 306.18-19 (rigs kyi bu don dam pa ni de bzhin
gshegs pa rnams byung yang rung ma byung yang rung); on this pas-
sage see Tauscher 1981: n. 143 and 148. Cp. also MA kārikā VI.222:
sangs rgyas rnams ni byung ba 'am || ma byung yang rung dngos su
na || dngos po kun gyi stong pa nyid || gzhan gyi dngos por rab tu
bsgrags || (MABhed 339.18-340.1). Tauscher (1981: 102) translates:
"Mögen die Buddhas entstanden oder nicht entstanden sein, die Leer-
heit aller Dinge der Wirklichkeit nach (vastutaḥ) hat er als Höchstes
Sein (parabhāva) verkündet” (see also ibid., notes 492-494).
The noun dharma, like the the abstract noun dharmatā, is also
occasionally encountered in the meaning of "real nature," "essential
being” in Buddhist literature. One of the fundamental meanings of
dharma is "law," "truth"; the formulation of the truth in the form of
the Buddhist teaching, the Dharma, by extension, represents another
meaning of dharma. dharma understood as the Buddhist teaching
may also connote a norm for behaviour, that is, a law in the form of
an objective behavioural standard which finds expression in the Bud-
dhist teaching. Not far from the idea of dharma as "truth" is dharma
interpreted as, as just indicated, the real nature, the essential state, the
unshakeable law of things; again, the abstract dharmatā is often as-
signed the role of conveying this meaning. A weakening of the
meaning "rule, law, norm" is also found in various connections in
Buddhist texts: thus "definite, or essential, qualifier"; a further weak-
ening allows for the senses "attribute," "state". Seen from the phe-
nomenal side, dharma stands for the object itself. See Schmithausen
1969: 146. See also Hirakawa 1990: 45-48. Zimmermann, comment-
ing on the word dharmatā as it appears in the formula and in other
contexts in the Tathāgatagarbhasūtra, sets forth three main meanings
for dharmata; see Zimmermann 2002: 54f.376
APPENDICES
Appendix XI (re: §83., n. 406)
Naiyāyika opponents
Candrakīrti does not identify the opponents who demand to know
whether the Madhyamikas ascertain that no things exist by way of
pramāṇas. *LT's author also does not identify the opponents or
comment on any of the words or phrases in the citation. Most
scholars who have translated or studied this section of the PsP assign
the critique to Dignāga and/or representatives of the Buddhist logical-
epistemological school. Stcherbatsky (1927: 135, n. 10) avers that
"[t]his and the following discussion refers to the pramāṇa-viniscaya-
vāda of Dignāga and others." Tanji (1992: 5), in the English summary
for his study on PSP chapter one, refers to the first sentence of the
citation as "Dignāga's question." Siderits (1981: 120-122), pointing
out that theories specific to the logical-epistemological school are not
topical in the citation, considers the section's addressees to be in the
first place the Yogācāra-Sautrāntikas, i.e., Dignāga and his school,
and secondly, the Naiyāyikas. Rizzi (1988: 47) paraphrases PsP₁
55.11-57.11 and entitles the larger PsP₁ 55.11-75.13 (= PsPM §83-
PSPM $123) segment "The Controversy with the Buddhist Logicians";
he identifies the opponents as "Vijñānavādins," and then refers speci-
fically to "Dignāga and his disciples." Yoshimizu (1996: 12f.) has
drawn attention to the fact that the dGe lugs pa scholar 'Jam dbyangs
bzhad pa'i rdo rje Nga dbang brtson 'grus (1648-1721), who quotes
most of the citation in his Tshig gsal stong thun gyi tshad ma’i rnam
bshad, notes that the opponent is a "logician" (rtog ge ba); Yoshimizu
(n. 56) understands that Dignāga is the person intended. Huntington
(2003: 77) holds that the individual with whom Candrakīrti dialogues
immediately subsequent to the citation, that is, the adversary who
poses the two questions at PSPM §84 and §85 [= PSP₁ 57.4 and PSP₁
57.7], is Bhāviveka (he describes this passage as "part of an imagin-
ary conversation with a Buddhist philosopher who, given the context,
is almost certainly intended to represent the position of Bhāvavive-
ka"). Arnold, inspired by the appearance of pramāṇādhīnatvāt prame-
yadhigamasya in the critique and its near equivalence to PSV's *pra-
māṇādhīno hi prameyadhigamaḥ (on PS I.1), deems the speaker of
the cited objection to be Dignāga (cf. Arnold 2003: 141, n. 5; 2005a:PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
377
144, 261, n. 5, and 262, n. 13; 2005b: 415 and 419, n. 23). PSV's
*pramāṇādhīno hi prameyadhigamaḥ, it should be noted, is Hattori's
reconstruction (cf. Hattori 1968: Appendix) based on PSV Tibetan's
gzhal bya rtogs pa ni tshad ma la rag las pa yin and, presumably,
pramāṇādhīno hi prameyādhigamaḥ as found at the beginning of the
Pramāṇavarttikālankāra, where Prajñākaragupta repeats a good
number of the words and phrases from the PSV on PS I.1 (cf. Sankṛ-
tyāyana 1953: 3.18); the beginning of PST chapter six in the sole
extant Sanskrit manuscript of the PST reveals that the PSV (at least
the version known to Jinendrabuddhi) reads yasmāt pramāṇādhīnaḥ
prameyadhigamaḥ (cf. MacDonald 2011: 686). Although the differ-
ence is negligible, the opponents' use of the phrase by no means
proves that Dignāga is the interlocutor, for it is common knowledge
that the view that objects of valid cognition are apprehended in re-
liance on means of valid cognition is not exclusive to the Buddhist
logical-epistemological tradition: NS IV.2.29, for example, presents
an analogous formulation with pramāṇataś cārthapratipatteḥ. Hattori
(1968: 76, n. 1.10) has already remarked on the similarity of the state-
ment pramāṇādhīno prameyādhigamaḥ with the opening statement of
the NBh: pramāṇato 'rthapratipattau pravṛttisamarthyad arthavat
pramāṇam. It might be mentioned that the phrase pramāṇādhigamya-
tvāt prameyāṇām bhāvānam is placed in the opponent Naiyāyika’s
mouth in the commentary on VV 51 (cf. VVed 72.15-16). Garfield
(2008: 511) disagrees with Huntington's identification of the PSP
opponent as Bhāviveka (noting that Thakchoe considers the inter-
locutor to be Dignāga and that Arnold holds him to be a
Mīmāmsaka[!]) and states (ibid., n. 7) that he thinks "the passage is in
fact directed generally at any foundationalist account of pramāṇa.”
Seyfort Ruegg (2002: 95) refrains from identifying the opponent.
The ascription to Dignāga of the view, expressed at three different
points in the objection, that all things exist, cannot be accepted. As
stated in n. 406, Dignāga would have been fully aware that the Ma-
dhyamaka negation of things is made from the point of view of the
ultimate, and it is highly unlikely, indeed impossible, that he would
have engaged with his fellow Mahāyānists in a debate focussed on the
final nature of things in which he would utter pronouncements incon-
gruous with his own Yogācāra stance (on Dharmakīrti, as well as378
APPENDICES
Dignāga, as a Yogācāra proponent, cf., e.g., Dreyfus and Lindtner
1989, Steinkellner 1990; see also Tosaki's review of Singh [1987:
143] where he points out that for Dharmakīrti paramārthasat means
only the ultimate reality “of the mundane [laukika, samvṛti]”). Dig-
nāga shares with the Mādhyamikas the view that worldly things exist
only on the surface level and are in actuality unreal, but differs from
them in specifying that what appear to be external objects are merely
objective aspects within consciousness and in maintaining that ul-
timately, nothing but self-cognizing consciousness exists. In encoun-
ters where the topic of conversation was the ultimate status of things,
the declaration sarvabhāvāḥ santi would certainly have been rejected
by him. The same opponent's later objection that it is his "experi-
ence" that things arise (anubhava eşo 'smākam; cf. PsPM $87 [= PSP₁
58.7]) is just as difficult to accept as a Dignagean argument. It goes
without saying that it is also impossible to imagine the argument from
"experience" as well as the assertions in the present PSPM §83
objection as having been made by Bhāviveka.
Even though I cannot agree with Siderits' conclusion that Dignaga is
the main opponent, or with his adducing of NS II.1.13 and 14 to sub-
stantiate his inclusion of the Naiyāyikas (for details, see MacDonald
2011: 683f.), his observation that Yogācāra-Sautrāntika assumptions
are not thematic was correct, as was his postulation that the Naiyāyi-
kas are a target of the critique. They in fact appear to be the sole
target of the critique. Both the assertion that all things exist and the
idea that one's own experience of the things of the world corroborates
and confirms their existence accord with the realist views of the
Naiyāyikas. Similar, but less elaborated, versions of most of the argu-
ments set forth in the objection can in fact be found at two places in
Uddyotakara's NV. The first occurs as part of his commentary on NS
IV.1.40, which forms the response to an opponent who has just ar-
gued in NS IV.1.39 that there is not the establishment of own-being
(svabhāva) because things are reliant (āpekṣikatvāt), i.e., dependent
(NS IV.1.39: na svabhāvasiddhir āpekṣikatvāt [see NBh 238]). Ud-
dyotakara begins the relevant part of his commentary on NS IV.1.40
by referring to the opponent's thesis that everything is non-existent
(sarvam abhāvah), already set forth in NS IV.1.37 (NS IV.1.37:
sarvam abhāvo bhāveṣv itaretarābhāvasiddheḥ || [NBh 236]). Uddyo-379
takara argues: sarvam abhāva iti sarvathā cāyaṇ vādo vyāhataḥ | ko
vyāghātaḥ | ādau tāvat pramāṇopapattyanupapattī sarvam abhāva iti
bruvāṇaḥ pramāṇam paryanuyojyaḥ | yadi pramāṇam brūte vyāhatam
bhavati | atha nābhidhatte 'rtho 'sya na sidhyati pramāṇābhāvāt (cf.
NV 454.6-8; all punctuation changes in this quotation and those
below are mine) "And in all respects this assertion 'Everything is
non-existent' is contradicted. What contradiction [is there]? To begin,
first, there is the possibility/suitability or impossibility/non-suitability
of means of valid cognition: The one stating 'Everything is non-exist-
ent' is to be asked about the means of cognition [for validating this
state of affairs]. If he states [i.e., declares that there exists such] a
means of valid cognition, [the assertion that everything is non-exist-
ent] becomes contradicted. But if he does not name [one, i.e., does
not admit a valid means of cognition for its ascertainment], the mean-
ing of this [assertion] is not established on account of the non-
existence of means of valid cognition.” It is true that there is no talk
of ascertainment (niścaya) here in the NV, but the gist of the alterna-
tive arguments and the conclusions arrived at are quite close to those
of the first two arguments in the PSP citation. Later, in his commen-
tary on NS IV.2.27 where the opponent is again one who denies the
existence of things, Uddyotakara critiques the assertion that no things
are possible using some of the same arguments and expressions that
he employed in his NS IV.1.40 comments: sarvabhāvānupapattir iti
ca bruvāṇaḥ pramāṇam paryanuyojyaḥ yadi pramāṇam bravīti, vyā-
hatam bhavati | atha na bravīty artho 'sya na sidhyati pramāṇābhā-
vāt (cf. NV 487.17-18). With the next sentence, he adduces a further
reasoning: athāprāmāṇikī siddhiḥ sarvabhāvānām upapattir ity asya
kasmān na siddhiḥ (cf. NV 487.18-488.1) "But if there is establish-
ment without a means of cognition to validate [it], why [could] there
not [be] the establishment of this [viz., the state of affairs maintained
by us, namely,] 'There is the possibility of all things'?” This argu-
ment is easily recognizable as equivalent to the third one set forth by
the PsP's opponent. A strikingly similar trio of arguments had been
employed earlier by Pakṣilasvāmin Vātsyāyana in his NBh on NS
IV.2.30 (NS IV.2.30: pramāṇānupapattyupapattibhyām): evam ca
sati sarvam nāstīti nopapadyate | kasmāt | pramāṇānupapattyupapatti-
bhyām | yadi sarvam nāstīti pramāṇam upapadyate sarvam nāstīty
etad vyāhanyate | atha pramāṇam nopapadyate sarvam nāstīty asya
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE380
katham siddhiḥ | atha pramāṇam antarena siddhiḥ sarvam astīty asya
katham na siddhiḥ | (NBh 272.16-273.3; translated in MacDonald
2011: 691). The fact that the three appear together in the NBh and in
the second NV passage indicates that they were used collectively, as
they are here in Candrakīrti's citation, to refute the Madhyamaka
claim that things do not exist.
APPENDICES
On the argument for the existence of things based on their being ex-
perienced, see n. 430.
The attribution of the citation to the Nyaya school and the identifica-
tion of the opponent as a Naiyāyika is not undermined by the fact that
Candrakīrti, in his discussion with Dignāga after the confrontation
with the Naiyāyika (a confrontation that continues until the end of
PSPM §88 [= PSP₁ 58.13]), paraphrases VV 31 with the words: yadi
pramāṇādhīnaḥ prameyādhigamas tāni pramāṇāni kena paricchi-
dyanta iti vigrahavyāvartanyām vihito doṣaḥ (PSPM 891 [= PSP₁
59.4]). Candrakīrti's choice of words here, and his claim that his
opponent, i.e., Dignāga, has not refuted this fault (tadaparihārāt ...),
merely indicates that he considers that the fault assigned to the Naiya-
yika in the VV equally applies to Dignāga, because both share the
same view (Dignaga's holding of the view, however, is limited to the
surface level).Tibetan TextTibetan Edition
Introduction
The following critical edition of the Tibetan translation of the first
chapter of the Prasannapadā (Tibetan: Tshig gsal) has been made in
reliance on the four xylograph Tanjur (bsTan-'gyur) editions and the
only available manuscript Tanjur, the Golden Tanjur.¹ All of these
editions of the Tanjur are relatively recent. The Peking Tanjur was
completed in 1724, the Derge Tanjur in 1744, the Narthang Tanjur in
1742, and the Cone Tanjur in 1772;2 the Golden Tanjur, so called
because it is inscribed in gold letters, was written at the behest of
King Mi dbang pho lha bsod nams (r. 1728-1747).³ As is well known,
the variants of the four xylograph editions tend to fall into two main
groups: the Peking and Narthang variants cluster together, and the
Derge and Cone variants form separate clusters. My examination of
the Golden manuscript for the first chapter of the PsP supports what
has already been reported about its variants, to wit, that they cluster
with those of Peking and Narthang. The clustering is explained by
the "lineages" or "traditions" of the five available Tanjurs. The
Peking, Narthang and Golden Tanjurs were made in reliance on the
4
¹ Hand-written Tanjurs other than the Golden Tanjur are known to have been
produced in sNar-thang, Zha-lu, 'Phyong-rgyas, rTse-thang, rGyal-rtse and else-
where; it is not known if any of these survive. Cf. Skilling 1991: 138.
2 These are the completion dates presented in Skilling 1991: 138 and Schoening
1995: 132. Skilling remarks that the date of the Peking edition is uncertain; see his
note 1. See Schoening 1995: 133 for a tentative Tanjur Stemma.
³ On the Golden Tanjur, see Skilling 1991. Skilling (ibid., 138) writes, “It is thus a
royal edition, roughly contemporary with the Narthang xylograph Kanjur-Tanjur,
which was commissioned by the same king."
4 See Skilling 1991: 139. See also Deleanu 2006: 78ff.384
TIBETAN EDITION
'Phying bar sTag stse Tanjur (mid-seventeenth century), which
derives from the copy of the Zha lu Tanjur (fourteenth century)
deposited at 'Phying-ba sTag stse. The Derge Tanjur bears the direct
influence of four manuscript Tanjurs, which its editors compared
with each another for the sake of determining Derge's final readings.¹
The Cone Tanjur is little more than a copy of Derge.² Although many
of the details of Tanjur history remain obscure,³ the Derge Tanjur
clearly represents an attempt at a new "critical edition" of the Tanjur.ª
It presents the smoothest readings from the point of view of the
grammar and syntax of the Tibetan language, as well as what appear
to be occasional attempts to "smooth out" the meaning. Valuable as it
is for providing correct readings where Peking, etc., are corrupted,
Derge requires a discerning approach inasmuch as not a few of these
editorial changes simplify or at times even obfuscate the original
Tibetan.
Variants for the Tibetan of the first chapter of the PsP have been re-
corded in footnotes. Both the Narthang and the Golden Tanjur-the
former more often than the latter for the first chapter of the
PsP make use of orthographic abbreviations (skung yig). Those
6
¹ The Derge Tanjur was made in reliance on four Tanjurs: 1) a manuscript that had
been commissioned by rGa A gnyan dam pa (died 1303), 2) the manuscript edition
prepared by Si tu pan chen on the basis of an edition kept at 'Phying bar sTag stse, 3)
an edition that had belonged to the eleventh Karmapa Ye shes rdo rje (1676-1702),
and 4) a manuscript written in silver ink that belonged to the king of sDe dge, bsTan
pa tshe ring; this last manuscript Tanjur was of little use since it was a direct copy of
3). See Schaeffer 2009: 96.
2 Cone shares nearly all of Derge's variants and adds its own individual variants.
Deviations appear to have resulted from scribal and carving errors and not from
attempts at emendation. On the production of Cone, see Schaeffer 2009: 106ff.
3 Cf. de Jong's comments in IIJ 10 (1968): 296 (partially quoted in Schoening 1995:
124).
4 For details, see Schaeffer 2009: 96ff.
5 Punctuation variants have not been recorded.
6 Dorji Wangchuk notes that dPa'-ris Sangs-rgyas devotes a chapter of his Bod yig
'bri tshul to orthographic abbreviations (yig ge skung tshul). Wangchuk (2002: 120)
writes, “The benefit of skung yig, he states, is speed and economy of ink and paper."
He (ibid., 97, n. 15) remarks “In the case of the Golden bsTan 'gyur, however, thePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
385
found in the PSP are often formed in conjunction with a final or semi-
final particle and include, among others: choso for chos so; byedo for
byed do; yino for yin no; phyiro for phyir ro; thado for thad do; gyuro
for gyur ro; bshado for bshad do; srido for srid do; bzhino for bzhin
no; medo for med do; mede for med de; one also encounters tshigsu
for tshigs su; gnyis su for gnyisu; gnasu for gnas su; rjesu for rjes su;
sridu for srid du; cadu for cad du (of thams cad du); ngagi for ngag
gi; tshigis for tshig gis; tinge for ting nge (of ting nge 'dzin); rtoge for
rtog ge; thamd for thams cad; sangyas for sangs rgyas; and ye shes
abbreviated as y with double 'dreng bu, followed by s.¹ I have for the
most part not included these abbreviations in the notes. I have in
general (but not exclusively) tended to follow Derge's orthography
because it better accords with modern orthography; I thus
incorporate, e.g., Derge and Cone's particle zhes after final s into the
edition instead of Peking, etc.'s more archaic shes. nga/da variants
have only been recorded when the writing of one as the other results
in a different word. pa/ba variants as well as punctuation variants
have not been indicated.
I have interfered with the Tibetan translation as little as possible,
emending only wrong orthography, dropped negations, etc.
Untranslated words, words not reflected by the Sanskrit and other
deviations have been recorded in the apparatus to the critical Sanskrit
edition and in the notes to the Translation. The rare wrong
translations of phrases or sentences that must have resulted either
from different readings in the translators' manuscript(s) or from
Mahasumati's, Kanakavarman's, and/or Pa tshab's faulty interpret-
ation of the Sanskrit syntax or of Candrakīrti's thought have not been
tampered with, but are referred to and usually commented on in the
notes to the translation.
economy of gold might have been the primary motive for the extensive use of abbre-
viations."
1 Even though the Narthang and the Golden Tanjur belong to the same Tanjur trad-
ition, they do not, either singly or as a pair, consistently abbreviate the same words.Critical Editionrgya gar skad du | mū¹ la mā dhya² mi ka vṛtti³ pra sannaª pa da nā
ma | bod skad du | dbu ma rtsa ba'i 'grel pa tshig gsal ba [G 2a] zhes
bya ba | 'phags pa 'jam dpal gzhon nur gyur pa la phyag 'tshal lo ||
§1. gang zhig mtha' gnyis gnas la gnas bsal zhing ||
rdzogs sangs rgyas blo rgya mtshor skye ba brnyes ||
dam chos mdzod kyi zab mo nyid ji ltar ||
rjes su rtogs bzhin thugs rjes ston par mdzaď³ || [P 2a]
5
gang gi lta ba'i me dag gis ||
da dung phas rgol gzhung lugs kyi ||
bud shing [N 2a] dang ni 'jig [G 2b] rten gyi ||
yid kyi mun rnams 'joms par mdzad || [PSP₁ 2]
gang gi gnyis med ye shes gsung mda'i tshogs ||
lha dang bcas pa'i gdul bya'i 'jig rten la ||
kham gsum dag tu rgyal thabs legs mdzad bas ||
srid pa'i dgra sde ma lus 'joms mdzad pa6 ||
¹P, N: mu
² D, C: dhyā
3
vṛtti is transcribed as britti. The vowel r is (correctly) transcribed as ri, that is, with
the gi-gu reversed in order to distinguish it from consonantal r followed by i.
Scherrer-Schaub (1991: 19, n. 3) notes that “la semi-voyelle va est normalement
transcrite par le wa-zur, v. Lalou, Manuel 5; Hackin, Formulaire 87; mais en réalité
la transcription ba prime."
4 D, C: san na
P: mdzod
6D, C: pa'i390
TIBETAN EDITION
klu sgrub de la phyag 'tshal nas ni de'i ||
tshig le'ur byas pa'i 'grel pa sla ba dang
sdeb legs ngag gis¹ sbyar [C 2a] zhing [D 2a] rtog ge yi ||
rlung gis ma dkrugs rab tu gsal bar² bya ||
§2. de la bdag las ma yin gzhan las min || [N 26] zhes bya ba la sogs pa
ni 'chad par 'gyur ba'i bstan bcos³ so || [P 2b] de'i 'brel pa dang brjod
par bya ba dang | dgos pa'i dgos pa dag gang yin zhes 'dri na | dbu ma
la 'jug pa las bstan pa'i tshul gyis sems bskyed pa dang po gnyis su
med pa'i ye shes kyis brgyan pa | snying rje [G 3a] chen po sngon du
'gro ba | de bzhin gshegs pa'i ye shes 'byung ba’i rgyur gyur pa thog
mar mdzad nas | mthar [PSP₁ 3] shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i tshul
phyin ci ma log pa thugs su chud par gyur pa'i slob dpon klu sgrub
kyis gzhan khong du chud par bya ba'i phyir snying rjes bstan bcos
mdzad de³ zhes bya ba 'di ni re zhig bstan bcos kyi 'brel pa yin no ||
§3. slob dpon rang nyid 'chad par 'gyur ba'i bstan bcos' mtha' dag gi
brjod par bya ba'i don dgos pa dang bcas pa ston zhing | de phyin ci
ma log par ston par mdzad pa nyid [N 3a] kyi sgo nas che ba'i bdag
nyid brjod nas de'i ngo bo dang tha mi dad par [℃ 2b] bzhugs pa’i bla
1 G: gi
2 P, N, G: ba
3 P, N, G: chos
4 P, N, G: chos
5 P, N, G: do
6 N: bstan
7P, N, G: chosPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
ma dam pa de bzhin gshegs pa la bstan bcos rtsom pa'i rgyu can gyi
phyag mdzad [D 2b] par bzhed pas¹ |
gang gis rten cing 'brel par 'byung ||
'gag pa med pa skye med pa ||
chad pa med pa rtag med pa ||
'ong ba med pa 'gro med pa ||
tha dad don min don gcig min ||
spros pa nyer zhi zhi
391
zhes bya ba la sogs pa gsungs so ||
de la rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba 'gag pa med pa la sogs pa khyad
par brgyad kyis khyad par du byas pa ni | bstan chos kyi brjod par²
bya ba yin [PSP₁ 4] zhing mya ngan las 'das pa spros pa thams cad nye
bar zhi zhing zhi ba'i mtshan nyid can ni bstan bcos³ kyi dgos par
bstan la
¹P, N, G: nas
2 P: ba
3 P, N, G: chos
4 P, N, G: ni
5 P: sbyi'i
smra rnams kyi ||
dam pa de la phyag 'tshal lo ||
zhes bya ba 'dis ni phyag 'tshal ba bstan te
§4. de [N 3ы] ltar naª 'di ni re zhig tshigs su bcad pa gnyis kyi spyi'i³
don yin no ||392
TIBETAN EDITION
1
§5a.¹ yan lag gi don yang rnam par dbye bar bya ste [PSP₁ 5]
§6. de la pra ti ni [P 3a] phrad pa'i don to || i ti ni 'gro ba'i don to || lyap
kyi mtha' [G 3b] can pra ti² tya'i sgra ni phrad pa ste ltos³ pa la 'jug pa
tỉ²
yin te skad kyi byings ni nye bar bsgyur bas yongs su bsgyur ba’i
phyir ro ||
nye bar bsgyur ba'i dbang gis ni4 || skad byings don ni yongs
bsgyur te ||
gang gā’i chu ni mngar mod kyi || rgya mtsho chu yis ji bzhin
no ||
zhes bshad do || sa mud gong na yod pa’i pā³ ta ni 'byung ba’i don can
yin pas sa mud pãº ta’i sgra ni 'byung ba la 'jug go | de'i phyir dngos
po rnams kyi 'byung ba rgyu dang rkyen la ltos' pa ni rten cing 'brel
par ’byung ba’i don to ||
§7. gzhan dag ni³ pra ti ni zlos pa’i don to || i ti ni 'gro ba ste' chas pa
dang 'jig pa'o || i tya ni 'gro bar rung ba dag go zhes de ltar i tya'i
sgra de la phan pa’i mtha’ can du bye brag tu bshad nas SO SO SO sor
¹ I divide §5 as it appears in PsP and in my translation into §5a and §5b in PsP Tib
because the main part of Candrakīrti's word explanation for MMK I.1 has been
moved to a later section of the text. PsP Tib §5b occurs as part of PsP Tib §15. See
Translation Appendix IV.
2 D, C: ti
3 P, N: bltos; G: bstod
4 D, C: na
5 P: pa
6P, N, G: pa
7P, N, G: bltos
8D, C: om.
9
⁹N: t illegible¹ P: 'jigs
2 D, C: 'di
3
³ P: prad
'gro zhing 'jig¹ pa dang ldan pa rnams kyi 'byung ba ni rten cing
'brel par 'byung ba'o zhes brjod par byed do || [PSP₁ 6] de dag gi ltar na
dge slong dag khyed la rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba bstan par bya
yis sus rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba mthong ba des chos mthong ngo
zhes bya ba de lta bu la sogs ba'i yul la ni zlos pa'i [C 3a] don srid pa'i
phyir dang | tshig [D 3a] bsdu ba yod pa'i [N 4a] phyir bye brag tu bshad
pa legs par 'gyur na | mig dang gzugs la brten nas mig gi rnam par
shes pa 'byung ngo zhes bya ba de² lta bu la sogs pa'i yul 'dir ni mig
dang gzugs la brten nas zhes don gyi khyad par dngos su zhal gyis
bzhes shing| mig gi dbang po gcig gi rgyu can gyi rnam par shes pa
gcig kyang skye bar bzhed pa na brten nas zhes bya ba’i sgra la zlos
pa'i don nyid yod par ga la 'gyur | phrad³ pa'i don niª phrad nas
'byung ba ni rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba'o zhes don gyi khyad par
zhal gyis ma bzhes pa'i rten [G 4a] cing 'brel par 'byung [P 3b] ba'i [PsP₁
7] sgra la yang yod pa yin la | don gyi khyad par zhal gyis bzhes pa la
yang yod pa yin te| mig dang gzugs la brten nas mig dang gzugs
phrad cing mig dang gzugs la ltos5 nas zhes bshad pa'i phyir ro || i
tya'i sgra de la phan pa'i mtha' can yin na ni mig dang gzugs la brten
nas mig gi rnam par shes pa 'byung ngo zhes bya ba 'dir pra ti tya'i
sgra mi² zad pa³ ma yin pa'i phyir dang | tshig bsdu ba yod pa ma yin
C: nyid
5 P, N, G: bltos
6 C: da
4
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
7P, N, G: ni
8D, C: par
393394
pa'i phyir rnam par dbye ba thos par 'gyur ba yin dang | mig¹ dang
gzugs² la brten pa rnam par shes pa zhes bya bar 'don par 'gyur ba
zhig na 'di ni de lta bu yang ma yin pas | lyab kyi mtha' can mi [N 4b]
zad pa kho nar bye brag tu bshad pa khas blang bar bya'o ||
§8. gang zhig
kha cig na re rten cing zhes bya ba’i nye bar bsgyur ba ni³ zlos
pa'i don yin pa'i phyir dang | 'brel pa zhes bya ba phrad pa'i
don yin pa'i phyir dang 'byung ba zhes bya ba'i sgra ni skye
ba'i don yin pa'i phyir rkyen de dang5 de la brtenº nas ’byung
ba ste phrad nas 'byung ba'o zhe'o || gzhan dag na re7 so so so
sor [PSP₁ 8] 'jig pa dang Idan pa rnams kyi 'byung ba ni rten cing
'brel par 'byung ba'o zhe'o
zhes gzhan gyi bshad pa rjes su brjod nas sun 'byin par byed pa de ni
re zhig gzhan gyi phyogs rjes su brjod pa la mi mkhas pa nyid do
snyam mo || ci'i phyir zhe na | gang zhig rten cing 'brel par 'byung
ba'i sgra phrad pa'i don can du 'chad pa des ni rten cing zhes bya ba
[D 3b] zlos pa'i don du ma yin zhing [℃ ³ы] 'brel par zhes bya ba phrad
pa'i don du yang ma yin no || 'o na ci zhe na rten cing ni phrad pa’i [G
¹P, N, G: ming
2 D: gzug
3 N: ni or mi
4
C: bo’i
5
N: de dang illegible
6
TIBETAN EDITION
G: rten
7N: ri
8N: 'chang4b] don¹ yin zhing | 'brel par 'gro ba'i don yin la | tshogs pa rten cing
'brel pa'i sgra ni phrad pa nyid yin par 'chad par byed do || des na da
ni phrad nas 'byung ba ni rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba'o zhes de Itar
bshad par gyur pa'i rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba'i sgras gal te [P 4a]
dngos po srid tshad ma lus pa 'dzin par brjod par 'dod pa de'i tshe ni |
rgyu dang rkyen gyi tshogs pa de dang de phrad nas 'byung ba ni rten
cing 'brel par 'byung ba'o zhes zlos pa dang 'brel bar byed la | 'on te
bye² brag 'dzin pa de'i tshe ni mig dang gzugs la brten nas zhes zlos
pa dang 'brel pa ma yin no || de ltar na re zhig slob dpon ni rjes su
brjod pa la mi mkhas so³ ||
1
zhes sun³ 'byin smras pa gang yin pa de yang mi 'thad do || ci'i phyir
zhe na [PSP, 9] ji ltar med ces bya ba'i rigs pa ma bkod pas dam bca
ba tsam yin pa'i phyir ro ||
§10.-11. 'on te rnam par shes pa ni gzugs can ma yin pa'i phyir mig
dang phrad pa yod pa ma yin te | [N 5a] gzugs can rnams kho na la de
dang phrad pa mthong ba'i phyir ro snyam pa'i bsam pa 'di yin na ni |
de yang mi rigs te | dge slong 'di ni 'bras bu thob pa yin no zhes bya
D: dan
2 N: illegible
3
4
§9. de yang mi rung ste mig dang gzugs la brten nas mig gi
rnam par shes pa 'byung zhes gsungs pa 'di la donª gnyi ga
med pa'i phyir ro
5
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
395
N: pa'o
N: illegible
N: illegible396
ba 'di la¹ phrad pa khas blangs pa'i phyir dang | phrad nas zhes bya
ba'i sgra yang ltos² nas zhes bya ba’i sgra’i rnam grangs yin pa'i
phyir dang rten cing 'brel par³ zhes bya ba'i sgra ni |
zhes slob dpon klu sgrub kyis kyang phrad nas zhes bya ba'i don
nyid du zhal gyis bzhes pa'i phyir ro || des na skyon yang [G 5a] mi
'thad do zhes gzhan dag zer ro ||
TIBETAN EDITION
de dang de brten¹ gang 'byung5 ba ||
rang gi dngos por de ma skyes ||
§12. gang yang
'o na gang yin zhe na | 'di yod pas 'di 'byung la | 'di skyes pa'i
phyir 'di skye ba ste zhes bya ba rkyen 'di dang ldan pa nyid
kyi don ni rten cing 'brel par 'byung [D 4a] ba'i don to
zhes rang gi lugs rnam' par gzhag¹0 pa de yang 'thad pa ma yin te |
rten cing [PSP, 10] 'brel par zhes bya ba dang 'byung ba zhes bya ba'i
8
¹P, N, G: 'dir for 'di la
2 P, N, G: bltos
³ D, C: par 'byung ba (C: bar for par)
4 Em.: brten. D, C, P, N, G: rten
5 P, N: 'byungs
6N: kyad
7N: zhes
9
D: zhas
G: rnam rnam
10 P, N, G: bzhagsgra gnyis re re la don gyi [C 4a] khyad par ma brjod pa'i phyir la de
bye¹ brag tu bshad [Þ 4b] pa yang brjod par 'dod pa'i phyir ro ||
§13. ci ste yang dgon pa'i thig le zhes bya ba la sogs pa ltar rten cing
'brel par 'byung ba'i sgra ni gting tshugs pa'i sgrar khas blangs nas
de skad du brjod do zhe na | de yang mi 'thad de | rten cing 'brel par
'byung ba'i sgra ni slob dpon gyis |
de dang de brten² gang 'byung ba ||
rang gi dngos por de ma skyes ||
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§14. ci ste
zhes yan lag gi don dang rjes su 'brel pa nyid du zhal gyis bzhes pa'i
phyir ro||
397
1
¹ C: pye
2 G: rten
'di yod na ni 'di 'byung ste|| thung ngu yod na ring po bzhin ||
zhes bya bas 'chad par byed pas ni thung ngu dang phrad cing thung
ngu la³ brten te | thung ngu la ltos nas ring por³ 'gyur ro zhes de nyid
khas blangs par 'gyur ro || de'i phyir gang zhig sun 'byin pa deº nyid
khas blangs par rigs pa ma yin no || shin tu spros pas chog go ||
3 P, N, G: om. la
4 P, N, G: bltos
5
D: par
6G: 'di398
§15. de'i phyir de ltar na 'dir bcom ldan 'das kyis dngos po rnams kyi
'byung ba rgyu dang rkyen la ltos¹ pa yongs su gsal bar mdzad pa na |
dngos po rnams rgyu med [N 5b] pa nyid dang | rgyu gcig pu² nyid
dang | mi mthun pa'i rgyu las byung ba nyid dang | rang dang gzhan
dang gnyi gas byas pa nyid bkag par 'gyur la | de dag bkag pas ni [G
5b] dngos po kun rdzob pa rnams kyi rang gi ngo bo kun rdzob pa ji
ltar gnas pa bzhin gsungs par 'gyur ro || da ni rten cing 'brel par [PSP₁
11] ’byung ba kun rdzob pa de nyid rang bzhin gyis ma skyes pa nyid
kyi phyir 'phags pa'i ye shes la ltos³ nas 'di la 'gag pa yod pa ma yin
pa nas 'di la don gcig+ yod pa ma yin pa zhes bya ba'i bar 'gag pa
med pa la sogs pa khyad par brgyad kyis³ khyad par du byed de | §5b.
'gag pas na ʼgag pa ste | skad cig mar ’jig pa la 'gag pa zhes brjod
do || skye bas na skye ba ste bdag nyid kyi dngos por red pa'o || chad
pas na chad pa ste rgyun chad pa zhes bya ba'i don to || rtag pa niº
ther zug pa ste dus [D 4b] thams cad du gnas pa zhes bya ba'i [P 5a] don
to || ’ong bas na ’ong ba ste yul ring po na gnas pa rnams yul nye bar
'ong ba'o 'gro bas' na 'gro ba³ ste' yul nye ba na [℃ 4b] gnas pa
rnams yul ring por 'gro ba'o || tha dad pa'i don ni don tha dad pa ste |
don so so ba zhes bya ba'i tha tshig go || don yang de yin la gcig
¹P, N, G: bltos
2 N, P: bu
3 P, N, G: bltos
4 D, C: gcig pu
5 P, N, G: kyi
6
D: na
TIBETAN EDITION
7D, C: gas
8P, N, G: bas
⁹P, N, G: tekyang de yin pas na don gcig ste | don tha mi dad¹ cing so so ma yin
zhes bya ba'i tha tshig go || rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba la ji ltar 'gag
pa la sogs pa med pa de ltar ni bstan bcos mtha' dag gis ston par
'gyur ro || rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba la khyad par mtha' yas pa yod
du zin kyang brgyad dag gcig kho na nye bar bkod pa ni 'di dag kho
na gtsor rtsod pa'i yan lag tu gyur pa'i phyir ro ||
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§16. rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba ji ltar gnas pa bzhin² 'phags pa
rnams kyis gzigs na brjod bya dang rjod³ byed dang | mtshan nyid
dang mtshon bya la sogs pa'i spros [G 6a] pa rnams rnam pa thams cad
du zlog pa'i phyir | 'dir spros pa [N 6a] dag nye bar zhi bas rten cing
'brel par 'byung ba de nyid spros pa nyer zhi zhes bya'o || 'di la sems
dang sems las byung ba'i 'jug pa yang med dang | shes pa dang shes
bya'i tha snyad log pa'i sgo nas skye ba dang rga ba dang na ba dang
'chi ba la sogs pa'i nye bar 'tshe ba ma lus pa dang bral ba’i phyir na
zhi ba'o || ji skad bstan pa'i khyad par can gyi¹ rten cing brel par
'byung ba ni bstan par bya ba’i sgo nas 'dod pa dam pa yin pa'i phyir
las su bstan te
1 P, N, G: dang
2 D, C: bzhin du
3
§17. gang5 gis rten cing 'brel par 'byung ||
'gag pa med pa skye med pa ||
chad pa med pa rtag med pa ||
'ong ba med pa 'gro med pa ||
G: brjod
4 D, C: gyis
5 C: gad
399400
tha dad don min don cig min ||
spros pa nyer zhi zhi bstan pa ||
rdzogs pa’i sangs rgyas smra rnams kyi ||
dam pa de la phyag 'tshal lo||
zhes bya ba'o || [PsP₁ 12]
rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba ji skad du¹ bstan pa thugs su chud pa'i
phyir de bzhin gshegs pa nyag gcig don phyin ci ma log par gsung [P
5b] ba nyid du gzigs shing pha rol po'i smra ba thams cad byis pa rdol²
thabs³ smra ba dang 'dra bar thugs [D 5a] su chud de | de nas slob dpon
shin tu dad pa dang ldan par gyur pas slar yang bcom ldan 'das la
khyad par
du mdzad pa ni | smra rnams kyi dam pa zhes bya'o ||
§18. 'dir 'gag pa sngar bkag pa ni skye ba dang 'gag ba dag la snga
phyi'i rnam par gzhag³ pa med par [C 5a] bstan ba'i phyir te |
TIBETAN EDITION
gal te skye ba sngar gyur la
rga shi phyi ma yin na ni ||
skye ba rga shi med pa dang ||
ma shi bar yang skye bar 'gyur ||
zhes 'chad par 'gyur ro ||
¹D, C: om.
² D, C: rtol
3
C: thab
4 P, N, G: dang (ba)
5 P, N, G: bzhag
6 P: skyaPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
de'i phyir skye [G 6] ba ni snga bar¹ 'gyur² la| rga shi ni phyis³ so
zhes bya ba'i nges pa gang yin pa 'di med do ||
401
§19. da ni slob dpon rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba 'gag pa med pa la
sogs pas khyad par du 'phags par gyur³ pa bstan par bzhed nas | skye
ba bkag pas 'gag pa la sogs pa dgag pa sla bar dgongs shing thog [N
6b] mar skye ba dgag pa rtsom pa mdzad do || skye ba yang gzhan gyis
brtags pa na bdag gam gzhan nam gnyi ga 'am rgyu med pa zhig las
rtog grang na | thams cad du 'thad pa ma yin no snyam du nges par
mdzad nas bshad pa |
bdag las ma yin gzhan las min ||
gnyis las ma yin rgyu med min ||
dngos po gang dag gang na yang ||
skye ba nam yang yodº ma yin || MMK I.1 [PSP₁ 13]
§20. de la gang dag ces bya ba'i sgra ni rten pa'i tshig ste su dag ces
bya ba'i sgra'i rnam grangs so || gang na yang zhes bya ba'i sgra ni
rten gyi tshig ste | 'ga" zhig na yang zhes bya ba'i sgra'i rnam grangs
so || nam yang zhes bya ba ni gzhar yang zhes bya ba’i tha tshig go ||
de'i phyir bdag las dngos po gang dag gang na yang skye ba nam
¹D, C: sngar
2 P, N, G: gyur.
³ P: 'phyis
4 N: gang yin pa 'di illegible
5 D, C: 'gyur (ba)
6N: yong
7 P: 'gag402
TIBETAN EDITION
yang yod pa ma yin no zhes de ltar sbyar bar bya'o || de bzhin du dam
bca' ba gsum po la yang sbyar bar bya'o ||
§21. gal te bdag las skye ba ma yin pa nyid do zhes bya bar nges par
gzung¹ ba na | gzhan las skye'o² zhes mi 'dod pa nyid du 'gyur ba ma
yin nam zhe na ma yin te | med par dgag³ paª brjod par 'dod [P 6a] pa’i
phyir dang| gzhan las skye ba yang 'gog par 'gyur ba'i phyir ro ||
'thad pa gang gis bdag las skye bar mi 'gyur ba de ni |
de las [D 5b] de ni 'byung na yon tan 'ga' yang [G 7a] yod pa ma
yin ||
skyes par gyur pa slar yang skye bar rigs pa 'ang ma yin nyid ||
ces bya ba la sogs pas dbu ma la 'jug pa la sogs pa'i sgo nas nges par
bya'o || [PSP₁, 14]
§22. slob dpon sangs rgyas bskyangs kyis kyang
dngos po rnams bdag las skye ba med de de dag gi skye ba
don med pa nyid du 'gyur ba'i [℃ 5ы] phyir dang | shin tu thal bar
'gyur ba'i phyir ro || dngos po bdag gi bdag nyid du yod pa
rnams la ni yang skye ba la dgos pa med do|| ci ste yod kyang
skye na nam yang mi skye bar mi 'gyur ro ||
zhes gsungs so ||
¹P, N, G: bzung
2 P, N, G: skye bo
³ N: yang dag
4 N: parPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§23. 'di la kha cig gis
de ni rigs pa ma yin te gtan tshigs [N 7a] dang dpe ma brjod pa'i
phyir dang gzhan gyis smras pa'i nyes pa ma bsal ba'i phyir
ro || [PsP₁ 15] thal bar 'gyur ba'i tshig yin pa'i phyir skabs kyi don
las bzlog pas bsgrub par bya ba dang | de'i chos bzlog pa'i don
mngon pas dngos po rnams gzhan las skye bar 'gyur ba dang |
skye ba 'bras bu dang bcas pa nyid du 'gyur ba dang skye ba
thug' pa yod par 'gyur ba'i phyir grub pa'i mtha' dang 'gal bar
'gyur ro ||
zhes skyon smra ste |
P: thugs
2 D: smra ba
3 C: te
403
§24-25. skyon 'di dag thams cad ni rigs pa ma yin par kho bo cag gis
mthong ngo || ji ltar zhe na de la re zhig gtan tshigs dang dpe ma
brjod pa’i phyir dang zhes gang smras pa² de ni mi rigs so || ci'i phyir
zhe na gang gi phyir bdag las zhes bya ba ni yod pa rgyu nyid dang
|
de nyid skye'o zhes smras pa yin la³ | yod pa ni yang skye ba la dgos
pa ma mthong zhing thug pa med par yang mthong la| khyod kyis
skyes pa slar yang skye bar mi 'dod cing | [G 7b] thug pa med par yang
mi 'dod do || de'i phyir khyed cag gi rtsod pa ni 'thad pa dang bral ba
dang | rang gis khas blangs pa dang 'gal ba [³ 6] yin no zhes pha rol
po bdag las skye bar 'dod pa la 'dri bar byed pa yin te | gang las gtan
tshigs dang dpe bkod pa 'bras bu dang bcas par 'gyur ba 'di dag tsam
zhig gis brtsad pa na ci pha rol po khas len par mi byed dam 'on te
pha rol po rang gi khas blangs pa dang 'gal bas brtsad [D 6a] pas kyang
1404
mi ldog na ni de'i tshe ngo¹ tsha med pa nyid kyis gtan tshigs dang
dpe gnyis kyis kyang ldog par mi 'gyur ba nyid do || kho bo² cag ni
smyon pa dang lhan cig rtsod pa yang ma yin no || [PSP₁ 16] de’i phyir
slob dpon ni gnas ma yin par yang rjes su dpag pa 'tshang³ bar byed
pa na | bdag nyid rjes su dpag pa la dga' ba nyid mngon par byed paª
yin no || dbu ma pa' yin na ni rang gi rgyud kyi rjes su dpag par bya
ba rigs pa yang ma yin te | [C 6a] phyogs gzhan khas blangs pa med
pa'i phyir ro ||
§26. de skad du yang 'phags pa lhas
zhes bshad do ||
rtsod pa bzlog pa las kyang
TIBETAN EDITION
yod dang med dang yod med [N 7b] ces ||
phyogs ni gang la'ang yod min pa ||
de la yun ni ring po na'ang ||
klan ka brjod par nus ma yin ||
4
gal te ngas dam bcas 'ga' yod ||
desº na nga la skyon de yod ||
nga la dam bca' med pas na
nga la skyon med kho na yin ||
1
¹ N: do
P: kho for kho bo; G: ko'o
3
Em: 'tshang. P, N: 'chang; G: 'chad; D, C: tshang
D: pha
5 P, N, G: om.
6 G: disgal te mngon sum la sogs pa'i ||
don gyis 'ga' zhig dmigs na ni ||
sgrub pa'am¹ bzlog par bya na de ||
med phyir nga la klan ka med ||
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
ces gsungs so ||
§27. gang gi tshe de ltar dbu ma pas rang gi rgyud kyi rjes su dpag pa
mi brjod pa nyid yin pa² de'i tshe³ | [PsP₁ 17]
dam bca' ba'i don [G 8a] 'di gang yin| ci bdag las zhes³ bya ba
'bras bu'i bdag nyid las sam 'on te rgyu'i bdag nyid las yin
grang de las cir 'gyur | gal te 'bras bu’i bdag nyid las yin na ni
grub pa la sgrub pa yin la| rgyu'i bdag nyid las yin na ni 'gal
ba'i don nyid du 'gyur te | [PSP₁ 18] skye ba dang ldan pa thams
cad ni rgyu'i bdag nyid du yod pa kho na skye ba'i phyir ro ||
405
zhes bya bar gang la grangs can pa dag gis [P 7a] phyir zlogº par byed
par 'gyur ba' nang gi skye mched rnams bdag las skye ba med de
zhes bya ba'i rang gi rgyud kyi dam bca' ba lta ga la yod | kho bo cag
¹D, C: 'ang
2 D, C: par
3
D: de'i tshe gang la grangs can pa dag gis |
4
G: don don 'di
5 P, N: shes
6P, N, G: bzlog
7D, C: la
8D, C: dag406
la ni gang zhig grub¹ pa la sgrub pa nyid dam | 'gal ba'i don nyid du
'gyur zhing grub pa la sgrub pa nyid gang yin pa dang | 'gal ba’i²
don nyid gang yin pa de³ spang bar [D 6b] bya ba'i phyir 'bad¹ pa byed
par 'gyur ba yod pa'i phyir zhes bya ba'i gtan tshigs kyang ga la yod
de'i phyir gzhan gyis smras pa'i nyes par thal bar mi 'gyur ba nyid
kyi phyir slob dpon sangs rgyas bskyangs kyis de'i lan brjod par bya
ba ma yin no ||
§28. ci ste yang dbu ma pa rnams kyi ltar na phyogs dang gtan tshigs
dang dpe dag ma grub pas rang gi rgyud kyi rjes su dpag pa ma³ brjod
pa nyid kyi' phyir bdag las skye ba dgag pa'i dam bca' ba'i don sgrub
pa dang gnyi ga [℃ 6b] la grub pa'i rjes su dpag pas gzhan gyi dam
bca' ba' bsal bar ma gyur mod | gzhan gyi dam bca' ba la rang gi rjes
su dpag pas 'gal ba brjod par ni bya dgos pas | rang nyid [N 8a] la
phyogs la sogs pa' phyogs¹0 dang gtan tshigs dang¹¹ dpe'i skyon dang
bral ba dag yod par bya dgos so || de'i [G 8b] phyir de ma brjod pa'i
phyir dang | de'i¹² nyes pa ma bsal ba'i phyir nyes pa de nyid du 'gyur
ro snyam na | [PSP₁ 19]
11
1
2
N: illegible
D: ba'
TIBETAN EDITION
³ D, C: om.
3
4 C: 'pad
5 P, N, G: mi
6N: kyis
7D, C: om.
8
N: illegible
⁹ P, N, G: pa dang
10 D, C: om.
11 D, C: om.
12 P: de illegiblePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
bshad par bya ste de ni de Itar ma yin no || ci'i phyir zhe na | gang gi
phyir don gang zhig gang gi dam bcas pa des ni rang nyid kyi¹ nges²
pa bzhin du gzhan dag la nges³ pa bskyed par 'dod pas don 'di'i
'thad pa gang gi sgo nas khong du chud pa'i 'thad pa de nyid gzhan la
bsnyad³ par bya dgos so || de'i phyir rang gis khas blangs pa'i dam
bcas pa'i don gyi sgrub par byed pa ni pha rol po kho nas nye bar
dgod par bya ba gang yin pa de' ni re zhig lugs yin³ no' || 'di ni gzhan
la gtan tshigs kyang ma yin no || gtan tshigs dang | dpe med pa'i phyir
rang gi dam bca' ba’i don [P 7b] gyi sgrub par byed pa ni khas 'ches
pa'i rjes su 'brangs pa 'ba' zhig nye bar bkod pa yin te de'i phyir
'thad pa dang bral ba'i phyogs khas blangs pas 'di ni bdag nyid kho
na la slu bar byed pas gzhan la nges¹⁰ pa bskyed par mi nus so zhes
bya bar gang rang gi dam bca' ba'i don gyi sgrub par byed pa la nus
pa med pa 'di nyid 'di'i sun 'byin pa ches gsal po yin te 'dir rjes su
dpag pas gnod pa brjod pa la dgos pa go ci zhig yod |
|
§29. ci ste yang rang gi rjes su dpag pas 'gal ba gdon mi za bar brjod
par bya ba yin no¹¹ zhe na | [PSP₁ 20]
11
¹ Em.: kyi. PsP Skt: svaniscayavat. P, G, N, D, C: kyis
2 N: des
3 N: des
4 N: pa
5
407
N: bsnyan
6 C: rad
7D, C: 'di
8D, C: ma yin
9
⁹ P, N, G: na (). See PsP Skt for the correct reading for this and the following
sentence.
10 N: des
11 G: om.408
de yang slob dpon [D 7a] sangs rgyas bskyangs kyis brjod pa nyid yin
no || ji ltar zhe na | gang gi phyir des¹ ni 'di skad du bshad pa yin te |
dngos po rnams bdag las skye ba med de de dag gi skye ba don med
pa nyid du 'gyur ba'i phyir dang zhes bshad pa'i phyir ro || de la de
dag ces bya ba 'dis ni rang gi bdag [G 9a] nyid du yod pa 'dzin pa yin
no || ci'i phyir zhe na | 'di ltar rang gi bdag nyid du yod pa dag la ni
yang skye ba la dgos pa med do zhes bya ba 'di ni mdor bzhag pa'i
ngag de'i 'grel pa'i² ngag yin langag 'dis [C 7a) ni chos mthun pa'i
dpe [№ 8b] gzhan la rab tu grags pa bsgrub par bya ba dang sgrub³ par
byed pa'it chos dang ldan pa nye bar gzung5 ba yin no || deº la rang gi
bdag nyid du yod pa zhes bya ba 'dis ni gtan tshigs 'dzin pa yin no ||
skyes ba don med pa nyid du 'gyur ba'i phyir dang zhes bya 'dis ni
bsgrub par bya' ba'i chos 'dzin pa yin no ||
de la ji ltar sgra mi rtag ste | byas pa mi rtag pa'i phyir ro || byas pa ni
mi rtag par mthong ste | dper na bum pa bzhin no || de bzhin du sgra
yang byas pa yin te de'i phyir byas pa nyid kyi phyir mi rtag pa yin
no zhes 'dir nye bar sbyar bas gsal bar byas pa'i byas pa gtan tshigs
yin pa [PSP₁ 21] de bzhin du | 'dir yang dngos po rnams bdag las skye ba
med de rang gi bdag nyid du yod pa la [P 8a] yang skye ba don med
pa nyid du 'gyur ba'i phyir ro ||
1 P: nges
2 G, C: ba'i
3
TIBETAN EDITION
C: bsgrub
4 P, N, G: pa
5 P, N, G: bzung
6 N: da
7 P: pya
8P, N, G: brtagPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
'di na ji ltar bum pa la sogs pa mdun na gnas shing gsal ba rang gi
bdag nyid du yod pa ni yang skye ba la mi ltos¹ par mthong ba de
bzhin du 'jim pa'i gong bu la sogs pa'i gnas skabs na yang gal te
rang gi bdag nyid du yod pa'i bum pa la sogs pa yod do snyam du
sems na ni de'i tshe yang rang gi bdag nyid du yod pa de la skye ba
yod pa ma yin no ||
409
de Itar na gtan tshigs nye bar sbyar bas gsal bar byas pa yang skye ba
dgag pa la mi 'khrul² ba | rang gi bdag nyid du yod pa nyid [G 9b] kyis
grangs can la rang nyid kyis rjes su dpag pas 'gal ba brjod pa mdzad
pa³ yin te des na de ni rigs pa ma yin te gtan tshigs dang dpe ma
brjod pa'i phyir dang zhes ci ste brjod par byed |
¹P, N, G: bltos
2 D: 'khr illegible
3 P, N, G: om. mdzad pa
4 N: om.
5 D, C: 'ga'
6P, N, G: kyis
7
§30. gtan tshigs dang dpe ma brjod pa [D 76] ma yin pa 'ba" zhig tu
ma zad kyi gzhan gyis smras pa'i nyes pa ma bsal ba yang ma yin
no || ci ltar zhe na grangs can pa dag7 mdun na gnas pa’i bum pa
|
mngon par gsal ba'i rang bzhin can ni yang mngon par gsal bar mi
'dod cing de nyid 'dir dpe nyid du grub pa'i ngo bo yin pa'i phyir la
nus pa'i ngo bor gyur cing mngon par gsal ba'i rang bzhin ma yin pa
skye ba bkag pas khyad par du byas pa ni bsgrub par bya ba yin pa [c
7b] nyid [N 9a] kyi phyir grub pa la sgrub pa'i phyogs kyi skyon nyid
du dogs pa 'am | gtan tshigs 'gal ba'i don nyid du dogs pa ga la yod |
G: ngag410
TIBETAN EDITION
de'i phyir rang gi rjes su dpag pas 'gal ba¹ brjod pa na yang ji skad
smras pa'i nyes pa brjod pa med pa'i phyir | gzhan gyis smras pa'i
nyes pa ma bsal ba med pa nyid de de'i phyir sun 'byin pa 'di dag ni
'brel pa med pa nyid do zhes shes par bya'o || [PSP, 22]
§31. bum pa la sogs pa zhes bya ba sogs pa’i sgras ni skye bar 'dod
pa'i dngos po ma² lus pa bsdu bar brjod³ parª 'dod pa'i phyir snam bu
la sogs pa dag gis ma nges par [P 8] 'gyur ba yang ma yin no ||
§32. yang na sbyor ba 'di ni tshul gzhan yin te rang las skye bar smra
ba'i skyes bu las tha dad pa'i don rnams ni bdag nyid las skye ba med
de rang gi bdag nyid du yod pa'i phyir | skyes bu bzhin no zhes dper
1
brjod pa 'di nyid dper brjod par bya'o ||
§33. gal tes yang skye ba gkag pas mngon par gsal bar [G 10a] smra ba
la gnod par byed pa ma yin pa de Ita na yang skye ba’i sgraº mngon
par gsal ba la btags nas sngon dang phyi mar ma dmigs pa dang
dmigs par chos mthun pas skye ba’i sgras mngon par gsal ba nyid
brjod pa'i phyir 'di bkag pas gnod par byed pa ma yin pa ma yin'
no ||
¹ P, N, G: om. ba
2 N: tha
3 D, C: om.
4 D, C: om.
5
N: illegible
6P, N, G: sgras
7 Em: ma yin pa ma yin. P, N, G, D, C: ma yin. PsP Skt (ayam pratiṣedho nābādha-
kaḥ) expects a double negation. The Tibetan sentence without the double negation is
at variance with the preceding argumentation. I assume that the second ma yin
dropped out due to haplography.§34. yang ji skad smras pa'i don gyi rjod¹ par byed pa med par rnam
par dpyod pa 'di lta bu 'di ji ltar rnyed ce na | [PSP₁ 23] bshad par bya
ste don gyi ngag 'di dag ni don chen po can yin pas ji skad smras
pa'i don bsdus nas 'jug pa yin la de dag kyang bshad na ji skad
smras pa'i don gyi bdag nyid 'byin par byed pa yin pas | 'dir ma bstan
pa cung zad kyang mi srid do ||
1
G: brjod
2 P, N, G: cag la
$35. thal bar 'gyur ba bzlog pa'i don dang [D 8a] yang pha rol po nyid
'brel pa yin gyi | kho bo cag² ni ma yin te | rang la dam bca' ba med
pa'i phyir ro || de’i phyir kho bo cag la³ grub pa'i mtha’ dang 'gal ba
ga la yod thal ba las bzlog pa bsgrub pas pha rol po la nyes pa mang
po ci tsam du 'gyur ba de tsam kho bo cag mngon par 'dod pa kho na
yin pas [PSP₁ 24] gang las [№ 9b] 'di la gzhan gyis glags rnyed par 'gyur
ba slob dpon klu sgrub kyi lugs phyin ci ma log pa'i rjes su 'brang ba
slob dpon sangs rgyas bskyangs la [C 8a] glags dang bcas pa'i tshigs
gsung ba nyid ga la yod rang bzhin med par smra bas rang bzhin
dang bcas par smra ba la thal ba bsgrubs pa na thal ba las bzlog pa'i
don can du thal bar ga la 'gyur te| sgra rnams ni dbyug paª dang
zhags pa can bzhin du smra ba po rang dbang med³ [G 10¹] par byed pa
ma yin [P 9a] no || 'o na ci zhe na nus pa yod na smra ba po'i brjod par
'dod pa'i rjes su byed pa yin no de'i phyir thal ba sgrub pa ni pha
3
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
C: om.
411
4 P, N, G: pa can
5 P, N, G: ma yin for med
6N: pa'i412
rol po'i dam bca' ba¹ 'gog pa tsam gyi 'bras bu can yin pa'i phyir thal
ba las zlog² pa'i don du 'gyur ba yod pa ma yin no ||
§36. de Itar yang slob dpon ni
nam mkha’i mtshan nyid snga rol na
nam mkha’ cung zad yod ma yin ||
gal te mtshan las sngar gyur na ||
mtshan³ nyid med par thal bar 'gyur ||
zhes bya ba dang | de bzhin du |
TIBETAN EDITION
gzugs kyi rgyu ni ma gtogs par ||
gzugs na gzugs kyi rgyu med par ||
thal bar 'gyur te don gang yang ||
rgyu med pa ni gang na'ang med ||
cess bya ba dang | de bzhin du [PSP₁ 25]
mya ngan 'das pa dngos po min ||
rga shi'i mtshan nyid thal bar 'gyur ||
rga dang 'chi ba med pa yiº ||
dngos po yod pa ma yin no ||
¹ D, C: la
2 P, N, G: bzlog
3
N: mtshon?
4 D, C: ni
5
G: zhes
6D, C: yinPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
413
zhes bya ba la sogs pas¹ phal cher thal ba bsgrub² pa kho na’i sgo nas
gzhan gyi phyogs sel bar mdzad do ||
§37. ci ste³ slob dpon gyi ngag rnams ni don gyi ngag yin pa'i phyir
don chen po nyid yin pas sbyor ba du ma’i rgyu nyid du rtogª na ni |
slob dpon sangs rgyas bskyangs kyi³ ngag dag kyang ci'i phyir de Itar
yongs su mi rtog
§38. 'on te sbyor ba'i ngag [D 8b] rgyas par rjod par byed pa gang yin
pa 'di ni 'grel pa mkhan po rnams kyi lugs yin no zhe na de yang
yod pa ma yin te | rtsod pa bzlog pa'i 'grel pa mdzad pa na | slob dpon
gyis kyang sbyor ba’i ngagº ma gsungs pa’i phyir ro ||
§39. gzhan yang rtog ge pa 'dis bdag nyid rtog ge'i bstan chos la shin
tu mkhas pa tsam zhig bstan par 'dod pas dbu ma pa'i Ita ba khas len
bzhin du yang [G 11a] rang gi¹ rgyud kyi sbyor ba'i ngag brjod pa gang
[N 10a] yin pa de ni ches shin tu nyes pa du ma'i tshogs kyi gnas su
rtogs te ji ltar zhe na | de la re zhig [℃ 8b] gang 'di skad du |
¹P, N, G: pa
2 C: sgrub
3 D, C: skye
4 D, C: rtogs
5 P, N, G: kyis
6P, N: rag
7D, C: om.
8 D, C: par na
'dir sbyor ba'i tshig tu 'gyur ba ni | don dam par³ [PsP₁ 26] nang
gi skye mched rnams [P 9b] bdag las skye ba med par nges te
yod pa'i phyir dper¹ na shes pa yod pa nyid bzhin no ||414
TIBETAN EDITION
zhes smras pa yin no || 'dir don dam pa zhes bya ba'i khyad par ci'i
phyir nye bar bkod pa yin |
§40. gal te 'jig rten gyi kun rdzob tu skye bar khas blangs pa dgag par
bya ba ma yin pa'i phyir dang | 'gog na yang khas blangs pas gnod
par thal bar 'gyur ba'i phyir ro zhe na | 'di ni rigs pa ma yin te | bdag
las skye ba ni kun rdzob tu yang khas ma blangs pa'i phyir ro||
§41. ji skad du mdo las
sa bon gyi rgyu las byung ba'i myu gu de yang skye ba na
bdag gis ma byas gzhan gyis ma byas gnyis kas ma byas
dbang phyug gis ma byas | dus kyis ma bsgyur | rdul phra rab
las ma byung rang bzhin las ma byung | ngo bo nyid las ma
|
byung rgyu med pa las ma skyes ||
zhes gsungs pa dang de bzhin du
sa bon yod na myu gu ji bzhin te ||
sa bon gang yin myu gu de nyid min
de las gzhan min de yang² ma yin te ||
de ltar rtag min chad min chos nyid do ||
zhes gsungs pa dang 'di nyid las kyang
gang la brten¹ te gang 'byung ba ||
¹N, G: om.
² N:yadde ni re zhig de nyid min ||
de las gzhan pa ang ma yin phyir² ||
de phyir³ chad min rtag ma yin ||
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
zhes 'chad do ||
§42. gzhan gyi lugs la ltosª te khyad par du byas so zhe na | de yang
rigs pa ma yin te | de dag gi rnam par gzhag pa ni kun rdzob [G 116] tu
yang khas blangs pa med pa'i phyir ro [PSP₁ 27] || bden pa gnyis' phyin
ci ma log par [D 9a] mthong ba las nyams pa'i mu stegs pa dag ni' ji
srid du gnyi ga'i sgo nas 'gog pa de srid du yon tan nyid yin par rtogs
so || de Itar na gzhan gyi gzhung la ltos te khyad par brjod pa yang
rigs pa ma yin no ||
10
11
§43. gang las de la ltos' nas kyang khyad par 'bras bu¹0 dang bcas par
'gyur ba 'jig rten pas¹¹ kyang bdag las skye bar mi rtogs te | 'jig rten
pas ni bdag dang gzhan las zhes bya ba [N 10b] de lta bu la sogs pa'i
¹P, N, G: rten
2 D, C: de; MMK, P: pa; MMK, D: phyir
³ P, N: phyin
4 P, N, G: bltos
5 P, N, G: bzhag
6
P: gnyis gyi; N, G: gnyis kyi
7D, C: om. ni
8P, N, G: bltos
⁹P, N, G: bltos
10
D: illegible
415
11 D, C: las416
rnam [P 10a] par dpyod¹ pa 'jug pa med par byas nas rgyu las 'bras bu
'byung ngo zhes bya ba 'di tsam zhig rtogs pa yin no ||
TIBETAN EDITION
§44. slob dpon yang de ltar rnam par gzhag² pa mdzad pa yin [C 9a] te |
de'i phyir rnam pa thams cad du khyad par don med pa nyid do zhes
bya bar nges so ||
§45. gzhan yang gal te kun rdzob tu skye ba dgag par 'dod nas khyad
par 'di 'god par byed na ni de'i tshe | rang la gzhi ma grub pa’i
phyogs kyi nyes pa 'am gzhi ma grub pa'i gtan tshigs kyi skyon du
'gyur te rang gis don dam par mig la sogs pa’i skye mched rnams
khas ma blangs pa'i phyir ro ||
§46. gal te kun rdzob tu mig la sogs pa yod pa'i phyir nyes pa med do
zhe na | 'o na don dam par zhes bya ba 'di gang gi khyad par yin |
§47. gal te mig la sogs pa kun rdzob pa rnams don dam par skye ba
'gog pa'i phyir don dam pa smos pa ni skye ba³ 'gog pa'i khyad par
yin no zhe na de lta na ni 'o na [PSP₁ 28] mig la sogs pa kun rdzob pa
rnamsª don dam par skye ba yod pa ma yin te zhes de skad brjod par
bya bar 'gyur na de skad du yang ma smras so || [G 12a] smra na yang
pha³ rol po dag gis mig la sogs pa rnams rzdas su yod pa nyid du khas
blangs pa'i phyir dang | btags par yod par khas ma blangs pa'i phyir |
¹ Em.: dpyod. P, N, G, D, C: spyod
2 P, N, G: bzhag
³ P, N, G: skye ba la
4 P, N, G: om. rnams
5
G: ba
6
Em.: btags. P, N, G, D, C: brtagsgzhan la gzhi ma grub pa'i phyogs kyi skyon¹ du 'gyur bas 'di ni mi
rigs so ||
§48. ci ste ji ltar sgra mi rtag ces bya ba la chos dang chos can gnyis
spyi² nyid gzung³ ba yin gyi | khyad par ni ma yin te | [PsP₁ 29] khyad
par ʼdzin na ni rjes su dpag pa dang rjes su dpag par bya ba'i tha
snyad med par 'gyur ro || 'di ltar gal te 'byung ba chen po bzhi las
gyur pa'i [D 9b] sgra 'dzin na ni de pha rol po la ma grub bo || 'on te
nam mkha'i yon tan 'dzin na ni de rang nyid sangs rgyas pa la ma
grub pa yin no || deª bzhin du bye brag pa sgra mi rtag par dam 'cha'
ba na yang | byas pa’i sgra ’dzin na de gzhan la ma grub bo³ || [P 10b]
'on te mngon par gsal bar byas pa yin na ni de rang la ma grub pa yin
no || de bzhin du ci rigs par 'jig pa yang gal te rgyu dang bcas pa yin
na ni de sangs rgyas pa rang la ma grub pa yin la| 'on te rgyu med
pa yin na ni de pha rol po la ma grub pa yin no || de'i phyir ji ltar [N
11a] 'dir chos dang chos can spyi tsam² zhig 'dzin pa de bzhin du |
'dir yang khyad par dor ba'i chos can tsam zhig 'dzin [℃ 9b] par 'gyur
ro zhe na |
¹ P: skyen
2 P, N, G: sbyi
³ P, N, G: bzung
4
de ni de ltar yang ma yin te| [PSP₁ 30] 'di ltar gang gi tshe 'dir skye ba
bkag pa bsgrub pars bya'i chos su 'dod pa' de'i tshe kho² nar de'i rten
5
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
P: da
D: po
6 G: ci
7
417
N: cam
8P, N, G: om. par418
rten chos can phyin ci log tsam gyis bdag gi dngos po rnyed pa ni
nyams par 'gyur bar 'dis rang nyid kyis khas blangs pa nyid do ||
phyin ci log dang phyin ci ma log pa dag ni tha dad pa yin no || de'i
phyir gang gi tshe rab rib can gyis³ skra shad la [G 12b] sogs pa Itar
phyin ci log gis yod pa ma yin pa yod pa nyid du 'dzin pa de'i tshe ni
yod par gyur pa'i don cha tsam yang dmigs par ga la 'gyur | gang gi
tshe rab rib can ma yin pas skra shad la sogs pa ltar phyin ci ma log
pas yang dag pa ma yin pa sgro mi 'dogs pa de’i tshe na yang gang
gis na de'i tshe na kun rdzob tu 'gyur ba yod pa ma yin par gyur pa’i
don cha tsam yang dmigs pa ga la yod ||
de nyid kyi phyir slob dpon gyi zhal snga nas kyang+
gal te mngon sum la sogs pa'i ||
don gyis 'ga' zhig dmigs na ni ||
sgrub pa'am bzlog par bya na de ||
med phyir nga la klan ka med ||
TIBETAN EDITION
ces gsungs so ||
gang gi phyir de ltar phyin ci log pa dang phyin ci ma log pa dag tha
dad pa de'i phyir phyin ci ma log pa'i gnas skabs na phyin ci log yod
pa ma yin pa'i phyir na gang zhig chos can nyid du 'gyur ba mig kun
|
rdzob pa lta ga la yod | de'i phyir gzhi ma grub pa'i phyogs kyi skyon
¹D, C: pa'i
2D, C: de kho
³ P, N, G: gyi
4 P, N, G: kyisdang| gzhi ma grub pa'i [D 10a] gtan tshigs kyi skyon ldog pa med pas¹
'di lan ma yin pa nyid do || [P 11a]
4
§49. dpe la yang 'dra ba yod pa ma yin no || der² ni sgra’i spyi dang
mi rtag pa nyid kyi spyi khyad par brjod par mi 'dod pa gnyi ga la
yang yod na de bzhin du mig gi³ spyi ni stong pa nyid dang stong pa
nyid ma yin par smra ba dag gis kun rdzob tu yang khas ma blangs
la don dam par yang ma yin pas dpe la yang 'dra ba yod pa ma yin
no ||
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§50. gzhi ma grub pa'i phyogs kyi nyes pa brjod pa’i tshul gang yin
pa 'di nyid ni yod pa'i phyir zhes bya ba'i gtan tshigs [N 12r] 'di la ma
grub pa'i skyon brjod pa la yang sbyar bar bya'o || [PSP₁ 31] de lta bu de
ni 'di ltar yin [G 13a] te gang gi phyir ji skad bsnyad³ pa'i don 'di ni
rtog ge paº 'dis rang nyid kyis khas blangs pa yin no || [C 10a] ji ltar zhe
na |
¹ Em.: med pas. P, N, G, D, C: med pa nyid pas
2 N: de
3
N: abbr. (?) migi
4
419
nang gi skye mched rnams skyed par byed pa rgyu la sogs pa ni
yod pa kho' na yin te de Itar de bzhin gshegs pas gsungs pa'i
phyir ro || gang de bzhin gshegs pas ji skad gsungs pa de ni de
bzhin te | dper na mya ngan las 'das pa ni zhi ba'o zhes bya ba
bzhin no ||
N: stod
5 P, N, G: snyad
6D, C: ba
7D, C: 'o420
zhes bya ba gzhan gyis bkod pa'i sgrub byed 'di la |
'dir khyod kyi¹ gtan tshigs kyi² don du 'dod pa gang³ yin | de
bzhin gshegs pas kun rdzob tu de skad gsungs pa’i phyir ram
'on te don dam par gsungs pa'i phyir | gal te kun rdzob tuª na ni
rang la gtan tshigs kyi don ma grub pa nyid do || 'on te don dam
par na ni |
3
TIBETAN EDITION
gang tshe chos ni yod pa dang ||
med dang yod med mi 'grub pas ||
de'i tshe 'bras bu yod pa dang med pa dang5 gnyi ga'i bdag
nyid kyi rkyen bsal ba'i phyir |
de ni sgrub par byed pa'i rgyu ma yin pa kho na'o zhes bya ba
ni ngag gi don to || de'i phyir don dam par bsgrub par bya ba
dang | sgrub par byed pa nyid ma grub pa'iº phyir | gtan tshigs
ma grub pa'i don nyid dang 'gal ba'i don nyid do
zhes 'dis skyon 'di smras pa yin no ||
¹P, N, G: kyis; PP kyi
2 P: without kyi
ji ltar sgrub byed rgyu zhes bya ||
de Ita yin na mi rigs so ||
N: om.
6N: par
P: gar
4 D, C: add following yin
5§51. 'di lta ste
gang gi phyir de ltar 'dis rang nyid [P 116] kyis¹ tshul 'dis gtan tshigs
ma grub par khas blangs pa de'i phyir dngos [D 10b] po'i chos gtan
tshigs su bkod pa’i rjes su dpag pa thams cad la gtan tshigs la sogs pa
rang la ma grub pa'i phyir sgrub par byed pa thams cad rnam par 'jig
par [G 13b] 'gyur ro||
yang na
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
don dam par² nang gi skye mched rnams de dag gi rkyen³ gzhan
dag las skye ba med de gzhan yin pa'i phyir dper na bum pa
bzhin no
421
don dam par gzhan gyis brjod par 'dod pa mig la sogs pa'i³
nang gi skye mched [PSP₁ 32] 'grub par byed pa dag rkyen ma yin
par nges te gzhan yin pa'i phyir | dper na snal ma la sogs pa
bzhin no ||
¹D, C: kyi
² D, C: par na
3 N: rgyen
zhes bya ba 'dir gzhan nyid ces bya ba la sogs pa rang nyid la ma
grub pa yin no ||
§52. ji ltar 'dis
4 D, C: pa'i
5 D, C: pa422
nang gi skye mched rnams [N 12a] skyes pa kho na yin te| de dag
gi yul dang ldan pa'i tha snyad khyad par can byed ba'i phyir
ro ||
zhes gzhan [℃ 10b] gyis brjod¹ pa'i gtan tshigs 'di la ma grub par brjod
par
'dod pas | 'di skad du
TIBETAN EDITION
'on te don dam par rnal 'byor pa mnyam par gzhag² pa'i³ shes
rab kyi mig gis dngos po rnams kyi yang dag pa ji lta ba bzhin
nyid mthong ba’i skye ba dang 'gro ba la sogs pa dag yod par
bsgrub na ni de'i tshe de dag gi yul dang ldan pa'i tha snyad
khyad par can byed pa'i phyir ro zhes bya ba'i gtan tshigs ma
grub pa'i don nyid deª | 'gro ba yang skye ba bkag5 pa kho nas
bkag pa'i phyir ro
zhes smras pa yin te| de bzhin du rang gis byas pa'i sgrub par byed
pa la yang6 |
6
don dam par ma song ba la 'gro ba med de | lam yin pa'i phyir |
song ba’i lam bzhin no ||
zhes bya ba'i gtan tshigs lam nyid rang nyid la7 ma¹ grub pa'i don
nyid du sbyar bar bya² la |
¹ P: brjed
² P, N, G: bzhag
3 PP: pa
4 D, C, G: do
5 C: 'kag?
N: lang pa
7 P, C: lam; N, G: om.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
de bzhin du
423
§53. don dam par brten pa dang bcas pa’i mig ni gzugs la lta³
bar mi byed de mig gi dbang po yin pa'i phyir | dper na de
dang mtshungs pa bzhin no || [PSP₁ 33]
zhes bya ba [G 14a] dang
mig ni gzugs [P 12a] la ltaª bar mi byed de³ | 'byung ba las gyur
pa nyid kyi phyir | dper na gzugs bzhin no
zhes bya ba dang |
sa ni sra ba'i ngo bo ma yin te 'byung ba yin pa'i phyir | dper
na rlung bzhin no ||
zhes bya ba la sogs pa dag tu yang gtan tshigs la sogs [D 11a] pa rang
nyid la ma grub pa sbyar bar bya'o ||
§54. yod pa'i phyir zhes bya ba'i gtan tshigs' 'di yang pha rol po'i Itar
na ci nang gi skye mched rnams yod pa'i phyir shes pa yod pa ltar
bdag las mi skye ba zhig gam 'on te bum pa la sogs pa bzhin du
bdag las skye ba zhig yin zhes ma nges pa yin no ||
¹ P, C: om.
2 Em.: sbyar bar bya la. Two verbs are connected by la (sbyar bar bya la... sbyar bar
bya'o). P, N, G, D, C: sbyar bar bya ba la
3 P, N, G: blta
4 P, N, G: blta
5 D, C: do
6D, C: om.
7P, N: tshig424
§55.gal te bum pa la sogs pa yang bsgrub byar mtshungs pa’i phyir
ma nges¹ pa nyid ma yin no zhe na | de ni de ltar ma yin te | de skad
du ma² smras pa'i phyir ro || [PsP₁ 34]
TIBETAN EDITION
§56. gal te gzhan gyi rjes su dpag pa dag la skyon ji skad du smras pa
de bzhin du rang gi rjes su dpag pa la yang ji skad smras pa'i nyes par
thal bas gzhi ma grub pa dang| gtan [N 12b] tshigs ma grub pa la sogs
pa'i skyon de nyid du 'gyur ba ma yin nam | de'i phyir gang³ gnyi ga
la skyon du 'gyur ba des ni gcig la brgal bar mi bya ste | des na skyon
'di dag thams cad mi rigs par 'gyur ro zhe na |
|
brjod par bya ste rang gi [C 11a] rgyud kyi rjes su dpag pa smra ba
dag la nyes pa 'dir 'gyur gyi¹ | kho bo cag³ ni rang rgyud kyi rjes su
dpag pa mi sbyor te rjes su dpag pa dag ni gzhan gyi dam bca' ba
'gog pa tsam gyi 'bras bu can yin pa'i phyir ro || 'di ltar gzhan [G 14b]
mig Ita'o zhes bya bar rtog pa de ni mig la rang gi7 bdag nyid mi Ita
ba'i chos kyang 'dod la gzhan la mi³ lta ba'i chos med na mi 'byung
ba nyid du yang khas blangs pa yin te | de'i phyir gang dang gang la
rang gi bdag nyid lta ba med pa de dang de la ni gzhan la lta ba yang
yod pa ma yin te | dper na bum pa bzhin no || mig la yang rang gi bdag
1
N: des
2 P, N, G: yang precedes
3 N: gad
4 N: gyid?
5 N: bca'
6N, G: bar
7N: ge
8
Em.: mi. P, N, G, D, C: om. mi. See PsP Skt, where the text has been emended to
include a negation; see also Translation note.nyid mi Ita ba yod pa yin te de'i phyir gzhan la¹ Ita ba yang 'di la
med do || de'i phyir rang [P 12b] gi bdag nyid mi lta ba dang 'gal bar
sngon po la sogs pa gzhan la lta ba rang la grags pa'i rjes su dpag pa
dang 'gal ba yin no || zhes de la grub pa'i rjes su dpag pas sel bar
byed pa yin no ||
gang gi phyir rjes su dpag pa dag gis 'di tsam zhig brjod par bya ba
yin pas | gang las nyes pa mtshungs² par 'gyur ba| kho bo cag gi
phyogs la ji skad bsnyad pa'i skyon 'jug pa ga la yod [D 11b]
§57. yang ci gang yang rung ba la grub pa'i rjes su dpag pa'i sgo nas
kyang rjes su dpag pas³ gnod pa yod dam zhe na |
¹ D, C: om.
2 N: tshuds
yod de de yang rang nyid la grub pa’i [PsP₁ 35] gtan tshigs nyid kyis yin
gyi | gzhan la grub pas ni ma yin te | 'jig rten nyid du mthong ba’i
phyir ro || 'jig rten na ni res 'ga' dpangª po'i rgol ba dang phyir rgol5
gnyis kyis tshad mar byas pa'i tshig gis rgyal ba 'am 'pham' par
'gyur la res 'ga' ni rang gi tshig kho nas 'gyur gyi| gzhan gyi tshig
gis ni rgyal ba 'am 'pham³ par 'gyur ba ma yin no || 'jig rten na ji ltar
[G 15a] yin pa de bzhin du rigs pa la yang yin te | 'jig rten pa'i tha
3
³ P, N, G: pa'i
C: dbang
4
5
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
425
C: rgol ba
6D, C: kyi
7D: pham
8
D: pham426
snyad kho na rigs pa'i bstan bcos¹ su skabs su bab² pa yin pa'i phyir
ro ||
§58. de nyid kyi phyir [N 13a] 'ga' zhig gis gzhan la grags pa'i dbang
gis ni rjes su dpag pas³ gnod pa ma yin te | gzhan la grags pa nyid
dgag par 'dod pa'i phyir ro zhes bshad do ||
§59. gang zhig gangª gnyi ga la nges par brjod pa [C 116] de ni sgrub³
pa 'am sun 'byin pa yin gyi | gang yang rung ba la grub pa 'am the
tshom za ba smra ba ni ma yin no snyam du sems pa des kyang 'jig
rten kyi tha snyad kyi rnam par gzhago pa la brten nas rjes su dpag pa
la ji skad smras pa'i tshul 'di nyid khas blang bar bya'o ||
§60. 'di ltar lung gis gnod pa ni gnyi ga la grub pa’i lung kho na'i sgo
nas ma yin te 'o na ci zhe na | rang la grub pa'i sgo nas kyang yin
no || rang gi don gyi rjes su dpag pa ni thams cad du [P 13a] rang la
grub pa nyid brling7 ba yin gyi | gnyi ga la grub pa ni ma yin no || [PSP₁
36] de nyid kyi phyir rtog ge'i mtshan nyid brjod pa ni dgos pa med pa
yin te sangs rgyas rnams kyis rang la ji ltar grags pa'i 'thad pas de
kho na mi shes pa'i gdul bya'is skye bo la phan btags pa'i phyir ro ||
shin tu spros pas chog go || dkyus ma nyid bshad par bya'o ||
¹P, N, G: chos
2 P: beb?
TIBETAN EDITION
³ Em.: pas. P, N, G, D, C: pa'i; cf. PsP₁ 19.7 dpag pas gnod; PsP₁ 35.8 lung gis gnod
pa
N: gad
5 P, N, G: bsgrub
6P, N, G: bzhag
7
N: brlid
4
8
C: ba'iPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§61. dngos po rnams ni gzhan las skye ba yang ma yin te | gzhan med
pa'i phyir ro || 'di yang |
dngos po rnams kyi rang bzhin ni ||
rkyen la sogs la¹ yod pa ma yin ||
gzhan yang
427
zes bya ba der 'chad par 'gyur ro ||
de'i phyir gzhan med pa nyid kyi phyir gzhan² las kyang skye ba ma
yin no || [D 12a]
gzhan la [G 15û] brten nas gal te gzhan zhig 'byung bar 'gyur na
ni ||
'o na me Ice las kyang mun pa mthug po 'byung³ 'gyur zhing4 ||
thams cad las kyang thams cad skye bar 'gyur te gang gi phyir ||
skyed par byed pa ma yin ma lus la 'ang gzhan nyid
mtshungs ||
zhes bya ba la sogs pas gzhan las skye ba dgag pa dbu ma la 'jug pa
las nges par bya'o ||
§62. slob dpon sangs rgyas bskyangs ni
¹P, N, G: pa
² N: gzhal
³ N: 'byud
4 N: zhid
5 D, C: add following pa
6N: sangs rgyas bskyangs illegible428
TIBETAN EDITION
dngos po rnams gzhan las skye ba med de | thams cad las kyang
thams cad skye bar 'gyur ba'i phyir ro ||
zhes rnam par¹ 'chad do ||
§63. 'di la slob dpon legs ldan 'byed ni
des na de la thal bar 'gyur ba'i ngag yin pa'i phyir bsgrub par
bya ba dang sgrub par byed pa bzlog par [PsP₁ 37] byas na | dngos
po rnams bdag [N 13b] gam gnyis sam rgyu med pa las skye bar
'gyur ba dang 'ga' zhig las 'ga' zhig skye bar 'gyur ba'i phyir
phyogs gong ma dang 'gal bar 'gyur ro || gzhan du na yang
thams cad las thams cad² skye bar 'gyur ba'i phyir ro || de bas
na de la sgrub pa dang [C 12a] sun 'byin pa nyid med ba'i phyir |
de ni don 'brel pa med pa yin
zhes sun 'byin smra'o ||
'di yang don 'brel pa med pa ma yin te | gong kho nar bstan zin pa'i
phyir [P 136] dang | gzhan gyis dam bcas pa'i don sun 'byin par byed
pa yin pa³ dang | sun 'byin pa nyid kyang yin pa'i phyir 'di ni gyi
na'o || des na slar yang 'bad par mi bya'o || [PSP, 38]
§64. dngos po rnams ni gnyi ga las skye ba yang ma yin te phyogs
gnyi ga la smras pa'i nyes par thal ba'i phyir dang | re re la skyed par
byed pa'i nus pa med pa'i phyir ro ||
1 N: om.
2
² D, C: add following las; N: thid
3 Em.: pa. P, N, G, D, C: om. pa. pa’i phyir is also possible. The Sanskrit expects pas
instead of pa dang.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
gal te re res¹ byas 'gyur na ||
sdug bsngal [G 16a] gnyi gas byas par 'gyur ||
zhes 'chad par 'gyur ro ||
§65. rgyu med pa las kyang mi skye ste²
rgyu med na ni 'bras bu dang ||
rgyu yang 'thad par mi 'gyur ro ||
429
zhes bya ba la sogs pas 'chad³ par 'gyur ba'i skyon du thal bar 'gyur
ba'i phyir dang
gal te rgyu yis stong na 'gro ba 'di dag gzung bya min ||
ji ltar nam mkha'i utpala yi¹ dri dang kha dog bzhin ||
zhe bya ba la sogs pa'i nyes par thal bar [D 126] 'gyur ba'i phyir ro ||
§66. slob dpon sangs rgyas bskyangs ni
dngos po rnams rgyu med pa las kyang skye ba med dertag tu
thams cad las thams cad skye bar thal bar 'gyur ro ||
zhes 'chad do ||
§67. 'di la yang slob dpon legs ldan 'byed |
¹P, N, G: re re
² N, G: om. rgyu med pa las kyang mi skye ste
³ N: 'chang
3
4 P, N, G: utpala’i430
de la yang thal bar 'gyur ba'i ngag yin pa'i phyir | gal te bsgrub
par bya ba [PsP₁39] dang sgrub par byed pa bzlog pa gsal ba
ngag¹ gi don du mngon par 'dod na de'i tshe 'di skad du |
dngos po rnams rgyu las skye bar 'gyur ba dang | lan 'ga' kha
cig las kha cig² skye bar 'gyur ba dang | rtsom pa 'bras bu dang
bcas pa nyid du 'gyur ba'i phyir ro || zhes bstan par 'gyur na |
bshad pa de ni mi rigs te³ | sngar¹ smras pa'i skyon du³ 'gyur
ba'i phyir ro ||
zhes sun 'byin paº smra'o ||
§68. gzhan dag na re 'di ni mi rigs te sngar7 lan btab zin pa'i phyir ro
zhe'o ||
§69. gang yang dbang phyug la sogs pa nye bar bsdu ba'i phyir yin no
zhes bya ba de yang rigs pa ma yin te | dbang phyug la sogs pa rnams
ni khas blangs pa [N 14a] ji lta ba bzhin du bdag dang gzhan dang gnyi
ga'i phyogs dag tu [P 14a] [C 12b] 'du ba'i phyir ro ||
§70. de'i phyir skye ba yod pa ma yin no zhes bya ba 'di bsgrubs pa
yin la skye ba [G 16] yod pa ma yin pas | rten cing 'brel par 'byung
ba skye ba med pa la sogs pas khyad par du byas pa grub pa yin no¹ ||
1 C: dag
2 G, N: om. las kha cig
³ N: ma te
3
4
P: sdar
5 D, C: add following thal bar
6P, N, G: par
7
TIBETAN EDITION
P: sdar
8 C: poPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§71. 'dir smras pa gal te de ltar rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba skye ba
med² pa la sogs pas khyad par du³ byas pa rnam par bzhagª na³ | 'o
na bcom ldan 'das kyis
431
ma rig pa'i rkyen gyis 'du byed rnams skye ba dang | ma rig pa
'gags pas 'du byed 'gag
ces bya ba dang de bzhin du |
kye ma 'du byed rnams mi rtag ||
skye zhing 'jig pa'i chos can yin ||
skyes nas 'jig par 'gyur ba ste ||
de dag nye bar zhi ba bde || [PSP₁40]
1 ¹P, N, G: om.
2 C: illegible
³ P, N, G: om.
4 D, C: gzhag
5 D, C: add following ni
6P, N, G: add following ni
7 P, N, G: cig
zhes bya ba dang | de bzhin du
de bzhin gshegs pa rnams byung yang rung de bzhin gshegs pa
|
rnams ma byung yang rung chos rnams kyi chos nyid 'di ni
gnas pa kho na ste
zhes bya ba dang |
sems can gnas par byed pa'i chos ni gcig7 ste | gang zas bzhi’o ||
[D 13a]432
'jig rten skyong bar byed¹ pa'i chos ni gnyis te | ngo tsha shes
pa dang khrel yod pa'o
zhes bya ba la sogs pa dang de bzhin du
'jig rten pha rol nas 'dir 'ongs so || 'jig rten 'di nas 'jig rten pha
rol tu² 'gro'o
zhes de ltar rten cing 'brel par 'byung³ ba 'gag pa la sogs pas khyad
par du byas pa bstan pa gang yin¹ pa de ji ltar 'gal bar mi 'gyur zhe
na |
TIBETAN EDITION
gang gi phyir de ltar rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba 'gag pa la sogs pa
dag yod par thos par 'gyur ba de nyid kyi phyir [PSP, 41] slob dpon gyis
drang ba dang nges pa'i don gyi mdo sde'i rnam par dbye ba bstan
par bya ba'i phyir dbu ma'i bstan bcos³ 'di mdzad pa yin no || de la
rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba’i skye ba la sogs pa dag bstan pa [N 14b]
gang yin pa de dag ni ma rigs pa’i [G 17a] rab rib dang bral ba dag gi
ye shes zag pa med pa'i yul gyi rang bzhin la ltosº nas ni ma yin no ||
'o na ci zhe na | ma rig pa’i rab rib kyis blo [P 146] gros kyi' mig
nyams par byas pa dag gi shes pa'i yul la ltos nas yin no' ||
¹P, N, G: om. bar byed
2 D: du
³ N: 'byud
3
4
N: illegible
5 P, N, G: chos
6P, N, G: bltos
7P, N, G: kyis
8P, N, G: bltos; C: Ites
9
G: repeats from ’o na ci zhe na | ma rig up to yul la bltos nas yin no ||§72. de kho na nyid¹ gzigs pa la ltos² nas ni bcom ldan 'das kyis
dge slong dag 'di ni bden pa dam pa ste | 'di lta ste slu³ ba med
pa'i chos can mya ngan las 'das pa'o || 'du byed [C_13a] thams
cad ni brdzun pa bslu ba'i chos can no
zhes bya ba la sogs pa gsungs so || de bzhin du |
'di ni³ de bzhin nyid dam phyin ci ma log pa'i de bzhin nyid ni
med kyi | 'di dag ni slu bar byeď pa'i chos can no || 'di dag ni
brdzun7
pa sgyu ma byis pa 'drid pa'o
zhes gsungs so| de bzhin du
zhes bya ba dang de bzhin du
¹P, N, G: om.
2 P, N, G: bltos
³ P, N, G: bslu
4 P, N, G: bslu
5
6
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
gzugs ni dbu ba rdos pa 'dra ||
tshor ba chu yi chu bur bzhin ||
'du shes smig rgyu lta bu ste
'du byed chu shing8 sdong po 'dra ||
rnam shes sgyu ma lta bu zhes ||
nyi ma'i gnyen gyis bka' stsal to ||
P: na
D: byad
7P, N, G: rdzun
8N: shid
433434
TIBETAN EDITION
dge slong brtson 'grus brtsams pa dran pa dang shes bzhin dang
Idan pa nyin dang mtshan du chos la so sor rtog par byed pa
na || 'du byed thams cad ni nye bar zhi ba'i go 'phang zhi ba|
chos rnams bdag med pa nyid rtogs par 'gyur ro¹ || [PSP₁ 42]
zhes bya ba la sogs pa gsungs so ||
§73. de Ita bur bstan pa'i dgongs pa mi shes pas | 'dir de kho na’i don
can gyi bstan pa ni gang zhig yindgongs pa can ni 'dir gang zhig yin
snyam du [G 17b] gang zhig the tshom du 'gyur ba dang | gang zhig blo
zhan pa nyid kyis drang ba'i don gyi bstan pa la nges² pa'i don du
rtogs pa de gnyi ga'i the tshom dang log pa'i shes pa dag rigs pa dang
lung gnyis kyi sgo nas bsal bar bya ba'i phyir | slob dpon gyis³ 'di
brtsams so de la bdag las ma yin zhes bya ba [N 15a] la sogs pas ni
rigs pa gsungs pa yin no ||
1
bcom ldan ’das kyis chos gang zhig ||
slu ba de ni brdzun zhes gsungs ||
'du byed thams cad slu³ ba'i chos ||
des na de dag brdzun pa yin ||
sngon [P 15a] mtha’ mngonº nam zhes zhus tshe ||
thub pa chen pos min zhes gsungs ||
N: om.
2 N: des
³ P, N, G: gyi
4 P, N, G: bslu
5 P, N, G: bslu
6 Em.: mngon. P, N, G, D, C: sngonPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
'khor ba thog ma mtha' med de ||
de la sngon med phyi ma med || [PSP₁ 43]
435
bcom ldan dngos dang dngos med pa ||
mkhyen pas kātyāyana¹ yi ||
gdams ngag² las ni yod pa dang ||
med pa gnyi ga’ang dgag pa mdzad
zhes bya ba la sogs pa lung gsungs pa yin no ||
§74. 'phags pa blo gros mi zad pas bstan pa'i mdo las |
nges pa'i don gyi mdo sde ni gang | drang ba'i don gyi mdo sde
ni gang zhe na | [℃ 136] mdo sde gang dag lam la 'jug pa'i phyir
bstan pa de dag ni drang ba’i don zhes bya'o || mdo sde gang
dag 'bras bu la 'jug pa'i phyir bstan pa de dag ni nges pa’i don
zhes bya'o || mdo sde gang dag bdag dang sems can dang srog
|
dang³ gso ba dang | skyes bu dang| gang zag dang | shed las
skyes dang shed bu* dang | byed pa po dangtshor ba po dang
sgra rnam pa sna tshogs su bshad pa dang bdag po med pa la
bdag po dang bcas par bstan pa de dag ni drang ba'i don zhes
bya'o || mdo sde gang dag [G 18a] stong pa nyid dang | mtshan
ma med pa dang | smon pa med pa dang | mngon par ’du mi
byed pa dang | ma skyes pa dang | ma byung ba dang | dngos po
med [ID 14a] pa dang | bdag med pa dang | sems can med pa dang |
¹ D, C: kātayana
2 N, C: dag
3 D, C: add following 'gro ba dang |
4
Em.: bu. See Braarvig 1993 (Vol 1): 117. P, N, G, D, C: bdag436
TIBETAN EDITION
srog med pa dang | gang zag¹ med pa dang | bdag² po med pas³
naª | rnam par thar pa'i' sgo'i bar du bstan pa de dag ni nges
pa'i don zhes bya ste | 'di dag ni nges' pa'i don gyi mdo sde la
rton gyidrang ba'i don gyi mdo sde la mi rton pa zhes bya'o ||
zhes gsungs pa dang [PSP₁ 44]
de bzhin du [N 15b] 'phags pa ting nge 'dzin gyi rgyal po las kyang |
stong pa bde bar gshegs pas bshad pa ltar ||
nges don mdo sde dag gi bye brag shes ||
gang las sems can gang zag skyes bu bstan¹0 ||
chos de thams cad drang ba’i don du [P 15b] shes ||
zhes gsungs so ||
.12
§75. de'i phyir skye ba la sogs pa bstan pa rnams brdzun¹¹ pa'i don
can du bstan ba'i phyir | slob dpon gyis rten cing 'brel par¹² 'byung
ba¹ rjes su ston pa brtsams so ||
¹ C: thag
1
2 N: dang bdag illegible
3 D, C: pa
4 D, C: nas. Braarvig 1993 (Vol. 1): 118: pa dang for pas na
5 C: ba'i
6 N: des
7N, C: des
8 P: bo
9 P: ston
10 D, C: bsten
11
¹¹ P, N, G: rdzun
¹2 D, C: bar§76. gal te skye ba la sogs pa mi srid pa yin dang | chos thams cad
brdzun² pa nyid du bstan par bya ba'i phyir slob dpon gyis 'di
brtsams pa yin na³ | de ltaª na ni gang brdzun³ pa de ni yod pa ma yin
pas mi dge ba'i las dag med par 'gyur la de med pas ngan 'gro dag
med par 'gyur zhing | dge ba dang bde 'gro dag kyang med par 'gyur
ro || bde 'gro dangº ngan 'gro med pa'i phyir 'khor ba yang yod pa ma
yin pas rtsom pa thams cad don med pa nyid du 'gyur ba ma yin nam
zhes7
1
¹P, N, G: om.
2 P, N, G: rdzun
³ D, C: no
4 N: Itar
5 P, N, G: rdzun
6P, N, G: 'ang
7D, C: zhe na
8P, N, G: bltos
9 P: om. mngon par
10
1⁰ P, N, G: rdzun
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
bshad par bya ste kun rdzob kyi bden pa la ltos³ nas 'di bden par
mngon par' zhen [G 18b] pa’i 'jig [C 14a] rten pa'i gnyen po nyid du kho
bo cag gis dngos po rnams brdzun¹0 pa'i don du bstan gyi | gang zhig
brdzun¹¹ pa 'am brdzun¹² pa ma yin par 'gyur ba 'phags pa rnams
kyis ni cung zad kyang gzigs pa ma yin no || gzhan yang gang gis chos
thams cad brdzun¹³ pa'i don can nyid du yongs su mkhyen pa de la ci
12
11
¹1 P, N, G: rdzun
437
12
¹2 P, N, G: rdzun
13 P, N, G: rdzun438
las yod cing 'khor ba yod dam | 'dis ni chos 'ga' yang¹ yod pa nyid
dam med pa nyid du dmigs pa² yang ma yin no || [PSP₁ 45]
ji skad du bcom ldan 'das kyis 'phags pa dkon mchog brtsegs pa'i
mdo las |
TIBETAN EDITION
'od srungs sems ni kun tu btsal na mi³ rnyed do || gang mi³
rnyed [D 146] pa de ni mi dmigs pa'o || gang mi dmigs pa de ni
'das pa yang ma yin | ma 'ongs pa yang ma yin | da ltar byung
ba yang ma yin no || gang 'das pa yang ma yin | [N 16a] ma ’ongs
pa yang ma yin| da ltar byung ba yang ma yin pa de la ni ngo
bo nyid med do|| gang ngo bo nyid med pa de la 'byung ba med
do gang 'byung ba med pa de la 'gag pa med do||
zhes rgya cher gsungs pa lta bu'o ||
gang dag phyin ci log dang ldan pas [P 16a] chos rnams brdzun7 pa
nyid du khong du mi chud cing | dngos po rnams rang bzhin yod par
rtogs nas mngon par zhen pa de ni chos rnams la 'di bden par mngon
par zhen pa nyid kyi sgo nas mngon par zhen par gyur dang las
kyang byed cing 'khor ba na yang 'khor bar 'gyur la phyin ci log la
¹ N: om.
2 D: ba
3 C: ma
4
C: gong
5
Em.: mi. P, N, G, D, C: ma. KP Tib: mi
6N: pa?
7P, N, G: rdzun
8P, N, G: om. 'khor ba na yangPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
gnas pas mya ngan las ’das pa thob pa’i skal ba can du yang mi 'gyur
ro ||
439
§77. yang ci dngos po brdzun¹ pa'i rang bzhin can rnams kyang kun
nas nyon mongs pa dang rnam par byang ba'i rgyur 'gyur ram zhe
na |
'gyur te dper na sgyu ma'i na chung² [G 19a] ni de'i rang bzhin mngon
par mi shes pa rnams kyi kun nas nyon mongs pa'i rgyu yin la | de
bzhin gshegs pa'i sprul pa ni dge ba'i rtsa ba bsags pa rnams kyi
rnam par byang ba'i rgyur 'gyur ba bzhin no || [PsP₁ 46]
lhag pa'i bsam pa brtan³ pa'i mdo las |
rigs kyi bu 'di Ita ste | dper na la la zhig gis sgyu ma mkhan gyi
rol mo byung ba'i tshe| sgyu ma mkhan gyis sprul pa’i bud
med mthong nas 'dod chags kyis sems dkris nas 'khor [C_14b]
gyis 'jigs shing bag tsha ste stan las langs nas song ste de
song nas bud med de nyid la mi sdug pa dang mi gtsang ba
dang | mi rtag pa dang | sdug bsngal ba dang | stong pa dang |
bdag med par yid la byed na
zhes rgyas par gsungs so ||
¹P, N, G: rdzun
2 N: cung
'dul ba las kyang | 'khrul 'khor mkhan gyis byas pa'i 'khrul 'khor gyi
na chung ni yang dag par bden pa'i na chung gis stong bzhin du | ri
mo mkhan gyi 'dod pa'i 'dod chags kyi gzhir gyur par bshad do ||
3
Em.: brtan. P, N, G, D, C: bstan440
TIBETAN EDITION
dpe de bzhin du dngos po brdzun¹ pa'i rang bzhin can rnams kyang
byis pa rnams kyi kun nas nyon mongs pa’i rgyu yin no || [N 16b] [PsP₁
47]
§78. de bzhin du 'phags pa dkon mchog [D 15a] brtsegs pa las kyang
de nas dge slong bsam gtan thob pa lnga brgya ni bcom ldan
'das kyi² chos bstan pa 'di la mi 'jug ste | ma rtogs ma mos pas
stan las langs [P 16b] te dong ngo | de nas bcom ldan 'das kyis
dge slong de dag³ lam gang nas dong ba'i lam der dge slong
gnyis shig sprul pa sprul te
de nas dge slong Inga brgya po de dag dge slong de gnyis lam
gang nas dong ba'i lam der dong [ G 196] ste phyin pa dang 'di
skad ces smras so || tshe dang ldan pa dag gar dong | sprul pa
gnyis kyis smras pa kho bo cag ni dgon pa'i gnas su bsam gtan
|
gyi bde ba la reg par gnas par bya bar dong ngo || de ci'i phyir
zhe na kho bo cag ni bcom ldan 'das kyis chos bstan pa gang
yin pa'is chos bstan pa de la mi 'jugs ste | ma rtogs mi mos
shing skrag ste kun tuº dngangs | kun tu7 rab tu dngangs par
gyur nas kho bo cag dgon pa'i gnas rnams su bsam gtan gyi bde
ba la reg par gnas pa rnams kyis gnas par bya'o || de nas dge
¹P, N, G: rdzun
2 D, C: kyis
3 C: de dag la
4 P: kyi
5 D, C: pa 'ang
6D, C: du
7D, C: duPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
441
slong Inga brgya po de dag gis¹ 'di skad ces smras so|| tshe
dang Idan pa dag | kho bo cag kyang bcom ldan 'das kyis chos
bstan pa la mi 'jug ste | ma rtogs ma mos shing skrag ste | kun
tu dngangs kun tu rab tu dngangs par gyur te de'i phyir kho bo
cag kyang dgon pa'i gnas rnams su bsam gtan gyi bde ba la reg
par gnas pa rnams kyis gnas par bya'o || sprul pa dag gis smras
pa tshe dang ldan pa dag de'i phyir bdag cag yang dag par [C
15a] bgro² bar bya'o || rtsod par mi bya'o || rtsod pa med pa lhur
byed pa³ ni dge sbyong gi chos so || tshe dang ldan pa dag gang
'di yongs su mya ngan las 'das pa zhes bya ba gang yongs su
|
mya ngan las 'da' bar 'gyur ba'i chos de gang | lus 'di la¹ bdag
gam | sems can nam | srog gam | skye ba po 'am | skyes bu 'am |
gang zag gam | shed las skyes sam | shed bu 'am | gang yongs
su mya ngan las 'da' bar 'gyur gang zad pas yongs su mya
ngan las 'da' | [G 20a] de dag [N 17a] gis smras pa | 'dod chags zad
zhe sdang zad gti mug zad pas yongs su mya ngan [P 17a] las
'da'o || [PSP₁ 48] sprul pa gnyis [D 15b] kyis smras pa| tshe dang
Idan pa dag 'dod chags dang zhe sdang dang gti mug yod pa yin
nam | ci nam de zad par bya | de dag gis smras5 pa | de dag ni
nang na yang med phyi rol na yang med | gnyi ga med par yang
mi dmigs te de dag ni yongs su ma brtags pa las kyang mi
skye'o || sprul pa gnyis kyis smras pa | tshe dang ldan pa dag de
3
D: adds following de
4 D, C: las
5 N: smros
¹D, C: rnams kyis for de dag gis
2
Em: bgro. P, N, G, D, C: 'gro. KP Tib: bgro (cf. KPed § 142.6 Tib; Weller 1965:
147, n. 2)442
1
lta bas na bdag tu ma rtog¹ rnam par ma rtog cig²| tshe dang
ldan ba dag nam mi rtog rnam par mi rtog pa de'i tshe chags
par mi 'gyur chags pa dang bral bar yang mi 'gyur ro || chags pa
med cing chags pa dang bral ba yang med pa gang yin pa de ni
zhi ba zhes bya'o || tshe dang ldan pa dag tshul khrims ni mi
'khor zhing³ yongs su mya ngan las mi 'da'o || tshe dang ldan
pa dag ting nge 'dzin dang | shes rab dang | rnam par grol ba
dang | rnam par grol ba'i ye shes mthong ba yang mi ’khor
zhing yong su mya ngan las mi 'da'o || tshe dang ldan pa dag |
chos de dag gis yongs su mya ngan las 'da' bar ston nachos de
dag kyang stong pa dben pa gzung du med pa'o tshe dang ldan
pa dag 'di Ita ste | mya ngan las 'das pa'i 'du shes spongs shig4|
'du shes5 la yang 'du shes su ma byed cig | 'du shes la 'du shes
kyis yongs su shes par ma byed cig gang 'du shes la 'du shes
|
kyis yongs su shes pa de'i de ni 'du shes la yongs su beings pa
yin no || [℃ 15b] tshe dang ldan pa dag khyed 'du shes dang [G 206]
tshor ba 'gog pa'i snyoms par 'jug pa la snyoms par zhugs
shig | tshe dang ldan pa dag | dge slong 'du shes dang tshor ba
'gog pa'i snyoms par 'jug pa la snyoms par zhugs pa las gong
na bya ba med do zhes smra'o ||
N: rtogs
² D, C: shig
3
N: zhang
TIBETAN EDITION
4 P, N, G: zhig
5 P, N, G: zhes
6N: illegible¹ P: gal for ga la
² C: pa dag
³ D, C: om.
3
4 P, G: om.
5 D, C: skyed
6
7
chos kyi rnam grangs 'di bshad pa'i tshe dge slong lnga brgya
po de dag len pa med par zag pa rnams las sems rnam par grol
lo || de dag [P 176] sems rnam par [N 176] grol nas bcom ldan 'das
ga la¹ ba der dong ste lhags pa dang | bcom ldan 'das kyi zhabs
la mgo bos phyag 'tshal te | phyogs gcig tu 'khod do || [PSP₁ 49] de
nas tshe dang ldan pa² rab 'byor gyis dge slong de³ dag la 'di
skad ces [D 16a] smras so|| tshe dang ldan pa dag gar dong gang
1
nas lhags| de dag gis smras pa| btsun pa rab 'byor gang du
yang 'gro ba med pa dang| gang nas kyang 'ong ba med pa'i
phyir bcom ldan 'das kyis chos bstan to || smras pa tshe dang4
Idan pa dag khyed kyi ston pa gang yin| smras pa gang ma
skyes shing yongs su mya ngan las mi 'da' ba'o || smras pa
khyed kyis ji ltar chos thos| smras pa bcings pa'i phyir yang
ma yin | thar pa’i phyir yang ma yin no || smras pa khyed sus
btul | smras pa su la lus med cing sems med pas so || smras pa
khyed ji ltar brtson smras pa ma rig pa spang ba'i phyir yang
ma yin rig pa bskyed pa'i phyir yang ma yin no || smras pa
khyeď ji ltar rnam par7 grol | smras pa sbyor ba'i phyir yang
ma yin| spang ba'i phyir yang ma yin no || smras pa khyed su'i
D: khyod
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
P: bar
8P, N, G: phyin
443444
¹ C: gim
2
nyan thos| smras pa gang gis¹ thob pa med cing mngon par
rdzogs par sangs rgyas pa med pa'i 'o|| [G 21a] smras pa khyed
kyi tshangs pa mtshungs par spyod pa gang | smras pa gang
khams gsum na mi rgyu ba rnams so || smras pa tshe dang ldan
pa dag ji srid cig na | yongs su mya ngan las 'da' | smras pa de
bzhin gshegs pa’i sprul ba nam yongs su mya ngan las 'da' ba
na'o || smras pa khyeď² kyis³ bya ba byas sam | smras pa ngar
'dzin pa dang nga¹ yir 'dzin pa yongs su shes pas so || smras pa
khyed³ kyi nyonº mongs pa zad dam² | smras ba chos thams cad
gtan du zad ba'i phyir ro || smras pa khyed kyis bdud btul lam |
smras pa phung po'i [℃ 16a] bdud mi dmigs pa'i phyir ro || smras
ba khyed kyis ston pa la bsnyen [P 18a] bkur byas sam smras pa
lus kyis kyang ma byas | ngag³ gis kyang ma byas | sems kyis
kyang ma byas so || smras pa khyod kyis yon gnas kyi sa
sbyangs sam smras pa 'dzin pa med cing sdud pa med pas so ||
smras pa [N 18a] khyed 'khor ba las brgalº tam | smras pa chad pa
med cing rtag pa med pa'i phyir ro || smras pa khyed yon gnas
kyi sar zhugs sam | smras pa 'dzin pa thams cad las rnam par
grol ba'i phyir ro || smras pa tshe dang ldan pa dag gar 'gro | [D
16b] smras pa de bzhin gshegs pa’i sprul ba gang du bzhud par
D: khyod
³ P, N, G: kyi
4 N: da
5
N: khyod
6N: thon
8
7N: ngam
N: dag
⁹ D, C: rgal
TIBETAN EDITION¹N: illegible
2 P, N, G: rdzun
3 N: bzhan
ro|| de ltar tshe dang ldan pa rab 'byor gyis [PSP₁ 50] yongs su
dris te dge slong de dag gis lan btab nas 'khor de'i dge slong
brgyad brgya ni len pa med par zag pa rnams las sems rnam par
grol lo|| srog chags sum khri nyis stong ni chos rnams la chos
kyi mig rdul med cing dri ma dang bral ba rnam par dag go ||
zhes gsungs so ||
de Itar na dge slong¹ [G 216] de bzhin gshegs pa'i sprul pa brdzun² pa’i
rang bzhin³ can gnyis kyis dge slong Inga brgya'i rnam par byang
ba'i rgyu byas pa yin no ||
§79.'phags pa rdo rje snying po las kyang
'jam dpal 'di Ita ste dper na | gtsub shing dang gtsub stan la
brten | mi’i lag pa’i rtsol ba la brten nas du ba 'byung zhing |
me mngon par 'grub ste me de yang gtsub shing³ la ’angº mi
|
gnas gtsub stan' la 'ang³ mi gnas | mi'i lag pa'i rtsol ba la 'ang'
mi gnas so || 'jam dpal de bzhin du med pa las skyes bu gang
zag rmongs pa la 'dod chags dang zhe sdang dang gti mug gi
yongs su gdung ba 'ang 'byung ste yongs su gdung ba de yang
4 D, C: gtan
5
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
N: shid
6 D, C: yang
7D, C: gtan
8D, C: yang
9D, C: yang
445446
¹ D: yang
2 P: da
3
nang na ʼang¹ mi gnas phyi rol na 'ang mi gnas | gnyi ga med
par yang mi gnas mod kyi| 'jam dpal 'on kyang gti mug ces
bya'o || de ci'i phyir gti mug ces brjod par bya zhe na | ’jam
dpal gti mug [P 18b] ni chos thams cad rab tu grol ba ste des na
gti mug ces bya'o zhes bya ba dang | de² bzhin du 'jam dpal
chos thams cad ni sems can dmyal ba'i sgo ste | 'di ni gzungs
kyi tshig go || [C 166] gsol ba bcom ldan 'das ji ltar na 'di gzungs
kyi tshig lags | bka' stsal³ pa 'jam dpal [N 186] sems can dmyal
ba dag ni byis pa [PSP₁ 51] so so'i skye bo rnams kyis yod pa ma
yin pa la phyin ci log gis bsgrubs shing rang gi rnam par rtog
|
pa las byung ba'o || gsol pa bcom ldan 'das sems can dmyal ba
dag gang du yang dag par 'du bar 'gyur | bcom ldan 'das kyis
bka' stsal pa 'jam dpal sems can dmyal ba dag ni nam mkhar
yang dag par 'du bar 'gyur ro || [G 22a] 'jam dpal de ji snyam du
sems [D 17a] sems can dmyal ba rang gi rnam par rtog pa las
byung ngam | 'on te ngo bo nyid las byung | gsol pa bcom Idan
'das byis pa so so'i skye bo rnams ni rang gi rnam par³ rtog pa
kho nas sems can dmyal ba dang | dud 'gro'i skye gnas dang |
gshin rje'i 'jig rten du 'du shes te de dag ma mchis pa la sgro
btags pa’i slad du tshor ba sdug bsngal myong zhing | ngan
song gsum du sdug bsngal nyams su myong bar 'gyur lags so ||
D: scal
TIBETAN EDITION
4
D: scal; N: sal
5 P, N, G: without rnam par7
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
¹P, N, G: gyur
2 D, C: ni
3 P, N, G: gnag
4P, G: dga'
5 D, C: gdung ba yongs su for yongs su gdung ba
6N: ddangs
bcom ldan 'das bdag gis ni ji ltar sems can dmyal ba ma khums
pa de bzhin du sems can dmyal ba'i sdug bsngal yang ma
khums so || bcom ldan 'das 'di lta ste skyes bu la la zhig gnyid
kyis log ste rmi lam na bdag nyid sems can dmyal bar ltung bar
'du shes par 'gyur¹ la des de na² lcags kyi bum pa skyes bu du
ma dang ldan pa khol ba 'bar bar bdag nyid bcug par yang 'du
shes par 'gyur ro || des de na sdug bsngal gyi tshor ba drag cing
mi bzad la brnag³ par dka"4 zhing yid du mi 'ong ba myong bar
'gyur ro|| des de na yid kyi yongs su gdung ba³ myong bar
'gyur | de de na [P 19a] skrag par 'gyur | dngangs par 'gyur | kun
tu dngangs par 'gyur ro || de de nas sad' par gyur zhing rlom pa
dang bcas pas kye ma sdug bsngal lo || kye ma sdug bsngal lo
zhes du zhing cho nges 'debs la smre sngags 'don par 'gyur
lags so || de nas de la grogs po dang gnyen³ dang snag gi gnyen
mtshams rnams kyis ci zhig gis 'di ltar khyod [G 22b] sdug
bsngal bar gyur zhes dris pa dang de grogs po dang gnyen
dang snag gi gnyen mtshams [N 19a] de dag la 'di skad du ngas
ni sems [C 17a] can dmyal ba’i sdug bsngal nyams su myong ngo
zhes smra bar bgyid | de bdag gis ni sems can dmyal ba'i sdug
bsngal nyams su myong na khyed cag ci zhig gis 'di ltar khyod
sdug bsngal bar gyur zhes 'dri bar byed dam zhes de dag la cho
N: sang
8P, G: mnyen
447448
nges 'debs par bgyid | spyo bar bgyid do || [PSP₁ 52] de nas skyes
bu de la grogs po dang gnyen dang snag gi gnyen mtshams de
dag 'di skad du | kye skyes bu ma 'jigs shig ma 'jigs shig|
khyod ni gnyid kyis log pa yin gyi | khyod khyim 'di nas gar [D
176] yang song ba med do zhes smra bar bgyid do || de yang
bdag ni gnyid kyis log par gyur te yang dag pa ma yin pa 'di
bdag gis kun tu¹ brtags so snyam du de la dran pa skye bar
'gyur zhing | slar yang de yid bde ba 'thob par 'gyur lags so ||
TIBETAN EDITION
bcom ldan 'das ji ltar skyes bu gnyid kyis log pa de yod pa ma²
yin pa la sgro btags nas bdag nyid rmi lam du dmyal bar song
bar³ 'du shes par 'gyur ba de bzhin du | bcom ldan 'das byis pa
so so'i skye bo bden pa ma lags pa'i 'dod chags kyis kun nas
beings pa thams cad bud med la mtshan mar rtog par bgyid do ||
de dag bud med la mtshan mar brtags¹ nas bdag nyid de dag
dang lhan cig rtse zhing dga' bar 'du shes so || byis pa so so'i
skye bo de 'di snyam du [P 196] bdag ni skyes pa'o || 'di ni bud
med do || bud med 'di bdag gi'o snyam du 'gyur [G 23a] zhing de
'dun pa'i 'dod chags kyis kun nas dkris pa'i sems des longs
spyod tshol bar sems 'jug par 'gyur lags so de gzhi de las
'thab pa dang rtsod pa dang g-yul 'gyed par bgyid cing gdug
pa'i dbang po dang ldan pa de la 'khon³ du 'dzin pa 'byung bar
'gyur lags so || rlom pa dang bcas pa de 'du shes phyin ci log
¹ D, C: du
2
C: me
3 D, C: bas
4 P, N, G: btags
5 D, C: khon1
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
des 'chi ba'i dus bgyis¹ par gyur nas bdag nyid bskal pa stong
phrag mang por sems can dmyal ba dag tu sdug bsngal gyi²
tshor ba myong bar 'du shes so || [N 19b]
N: bgyi
bcom ldan 'das ji ltar skyes bu de la grogs po dang gnyen dang
snag gi gnyen mtshams rnams kyis 'di skad du kye³ skyes bu
ma 'jigs shig¹ ma 'jigs shig khyod ni gnyid kyis [℃ 17b] log pa
yin gyi khyod khyim 'di nas gar yang song ba med do zhes
smra bar bgyid pa de bzhin du bcom ldan 'das sangs rgyas
bcom ldan 'das rnams kyis kyang phyin ci log bzhis phyin ci
log tu gyur pa'i sems can rnams la 'di skad du chos bstan te
'di la bud med kyang med skyes pa yang med sems can yang
med | srog kyang med | gso ba yang med | gang zag kyang med
de chos 'di dag thams cad ni log5 pa | chos 'di dag thams cad
ni yod pa ma yin pa | chos 'di dag thams cad [D 18a] ni phyin ci
log gis bsgrubs pa [PSP₁ 53] chos 'di dag thams cad ni sgyu ma
|
Ita buchos 'di dag thams cad niº rmi lam lta bu | chos 'di dag
thams cad ni sprul pa lta bu | chos 'di dag thams cad ni chu zla
Ita bu ste zhes rgyas par 'byung ba dang | de bzhin du de dag [G
23b] de bzhin gshegs pa'i chos bstan pa thos nas chos thams cad
'dod chags dang bral bar khums so || chos thams cad zhe sdang
dang bral ba dang gti mug dang bral ba dang ngo bo nyid
2 N: 'di
3 P: kyi
4 P, N, G: om. shig
5
449
D: lag
'P, N, G: om. chos 'di dag thams cad ni450
TIBETAN EDITION
med pa dang sgrib pa med par [P 20a] khums so || de dag sems
nam mkha’¹ la gnas pas 'chi ba'i dus bgyid par 'gyur zhing |
'chi ba'i dus bgyis ma thag tu phung po lhag ma med pa'i mya
ngan las 'das pa'i dbyings su mya ngan las 'da' ste | bcom² ldan
'das de Itar bdag gis sems can dmyal ba khums lags so
zhes gsungs so ||
§80. 'phags pa nye ba 'khor gyis zhus pa las kyang |
sems dmyal 'jigs pa nga yis bstan byas te ||
sems can stong phrag du ma skyo byas kyang ||
gang dag shi 'phos ngan song drag 'gro ba’i ||
'gro ba de dag nam yang yod ma yin ||
gang dag ral gri mda' chen mtshon 'byin pa'i ||
gnod pa byed pa yod pa ma yin te ||
rtog pa'i dbang gis ngan song de dag na ||
lus la 'bab mthong de na mtshon cha med || [PsP₁ 54]
sna tshogs yid [N 20a] dga' me tog kha bye zhing ||
gser gyi khang mchog 'bar ba yid 'ong ba ||
'di na de la 'ang byed pa³ 'ga' med do4 ||
de dag rtog pa'i dbang gis bzhag5 pa yin ||
1 N: abbr.? namkha'
2 N: bcom
3
Python (1973: 59; Python's Tibetan edition of the sūtra is based on P and N): po.
Upaliparipṛccha Tib D: pa.
4 Python (1973: 59): de (only in N)
5 D: gzhagrtog¹ pa'i dbang gis 'jig rten rnam brtags te ||
'du shes 'dzin pas byis pa rnam par phye ||
'dzin dang 'dzin [C 18a] med de yang 'byung min te ||
yongs su rtog pa sgyu² ma smig rgyu bzhin ||
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
zhes gsungs so de'i phyir de ltar na dngos po yod pa ma yin pa'i
rang bzhin can phyin ci log gis bzhag pa rnams ni 'khor ba na byis pa
rnams [G 24a] kyi kun nas nyon mongs pa'i rgyur 'gyur ro zhes bya bar
gnas so||
dngos po brdzun³ pa'i rang bzhin can rnams ji ltar kun nas nyon
mongs pa dang | rnam par byang ba’i rgyu nyid yin pa de Itar ni rgyas
par dbu ma la ’jugs pa las nges par bya'o ||
451
|
§81. 'dir smras pa [D 186] gal te bdag dang gzhan dang gnyi ga dang
rgyu med pa las dngos po rnams skye ba yod pa ma yin na | ji ltar³
bcom ldan 'das kyis ma rig pa'i rkyen gyis 'du byed rnams zhes
gsungs
1
bshad par bya ste | 'di ni kun [P 206] rdzob6 yin gyi de kho na nyid ni
ma yin no ||
§82. ci kun rdzob kyi¹ rnam par gzhag² pa brjod par bya ba yin nam
zhe na
N: rtogs
2 P: sgya
³ P, N, G: rdzun
4 C: pa
5 N: om. ji ltar
6D, C: rdzob pa452
rkyen nyid 'di pa tsam gyis kun rdzob grub par khas len gyi³ | phyogs
bzhi khas blangs pa’i sgo nas ni ma yin te dngos po rang bzhin dang
bcas pa smra bar thal bar 'gyur ba'i phyir dang | de yang rigs pa ma
yin pa'i phyir ro || rkyen nyid 'di pa tsam [PsP₁ 55] zhig khas blangs na
ni rgyu dang 'bras bu gnyis phan tshun ltos¹ pa'i phyir | ngo bo nyid
kyis grub pa yod pa ma yin pas dngos po rang bzhin dang bcas par
smra bar 'gyur ba ma yin no ||
de nyid kyi phyir |
zhes gsungs so|| 'di nyid las kyang
byed po las la brten byas shing ||
las kyang byed po de nyid la³ ||
brten nas 'byung ba ma gtogs pa6 ||
grub pa'i [N 20b] rgyu ni ma mthong ngo ||
zhes 'chad par 'gyur ro ||
5
sdug bsngal rang gis byas pa dang ||
gzhan gyis byas dang gnyi gas byas ||
rgyu med rtog ge ba yis 'dod ||
khyod kyis brten nas 'byung bar gsungs ||
¹ P: without kyi
2 P, N, G: bzhag
³ P: gyis
3
4P, N, G: bltos
6
TIBETAN EDITION
N: las
MMKT P: par;
D, P: pa
BP.
Ped: par; ABhed: par; but MMK₁ D: pa; MABh: pa; PsP chapter 8N: illegible
2 N: abbr. nuso
3 N: gang
4 C: om.
bcom ldan 'das [G 24b] kyis kyang de la chos kyi brda ni 'di yin te 'di
Ita ste 'di yod pas 'di 'byung la | 'di¹ skyes pas 'di skye ste | gang 'di
ma rig pa'i rkyen gyis 'du byed rnams | 'du byed kyi rkyen gyis rnam
par shes pa zhes bya ba la sogs pa 'di tsam zhig kho na gsungs so² ||
§83. 'dir 'ga' [C 18b] zhig dag rgol bar byed de
dngos po rnams skye ba med do snyam pa'i nges pa 'di tshad
ma las skyes pa zhig gam 'on te tshad ma ma yin pa las skyes
pa zhig yin grang³ | de la gal te tshad ma las skyes par 'dod na
ni | tshad ma dag ni du zhig | mtshan nyid ni gang | yul dag ni ci
zhig ci bdag las skyes pa zhig gam| gzhan nam gnyi ga 'am
rgyu med pa las yin zhes bya ba 'di brjod par bya'o || 'on te
tshad ma ma¹ yin pa las skyes pa yin na ni | de ni mi rigs te |
gzhal bya rtogs pa ni³ tshad ma la rag [P 21a] las pa'i phyir te | [D
19a] rtogs par ma gyur pa'i don ni tshad ma med par rtogs par
mi nus soº || tshad ma med pas don rtogs pa yang med na ni
khyod kyi yang dag pa'i nges pa 'di ga las 'gyur te de'i phyir
dngos po rnams skye ba med do zhes bya ba 'di ni rigs pa ma
yin no || yang na khyed kyi dngos po rnams skye ba med do
zhes bya ba'i nges pa 'di gang las gyur pa 'di nyid las nga’i
dngos po thams cad yod pa yin no zhes bya ba yang yin la
yang ji ltar khyod kyi dngos po thams cad skye ba med do zhes
1
5
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
N: om.
6N: abbr. gnaso
453454
brjod par bya ste | gal te kho bo cag la nges pa zhes bya ba 'ga" zhig
yod par 'gyur na ni | de tshad ma las skyes pa 'am | tshad ma ma yin
pa las skyes pa zhig tu [N 21a] 'gyur na | yod pa ni ma yin no || ci'i
phyir zhe na 'dir ma nges pa yod na ni de la ltosº shing de'i gnyen
por gyur pa'i nges pa yang yod par 'gyur ba zhig na gang gi tshe re
|
zhig kho bo cag la ma nges pa nyid yod pa ma yin pa de'i tshe' ni de
dang 'gal ba'i ngesº pa yod par ga la 'gyur te 'brel pa can gzhan la
ma ltos¹0 pa'i phyir | bong bu'i rwa'i ring ba¹¹ dang thung ba nyid
bzhin no || gang gi tshe de ltar nges pa [PSP₁ 57] med pa de'i tshe ci zhig
[C 19a] 'grub par bya ba'i phyir tshad ma dag yongs su rtog par byed¹2 |
11
bya ba'i nges pa 'dir 'gyur ba de kho na ltar [PsP₁ 56] nga’i dngos
po thams cad skye bar yang 'gyur ro || ci ste khyod la dngos po
thams cad skye ba med do snyam¹ pa'i nges pa 'di med na ni |
[G 25a] de'i tshe rang nyid kyis kyang ma nges pas² gzhan khong
du chud par byed pa mi srid pa'i phyir bstan bcos³ rtsom pa don
med pa nyid du 'gyur te des na dngos po thams cad bkag pa
med par yod pa yin no zhe na |
¹ P, N, G: snyams
2 TKK (2001: 4): em. pa la (PsP Skt: aniścitasya). The text makes sense as it stands.
³ P, N, G: chos
3
4 N: zhes
5 P: 'gag
6P, N, G: bltos
7
N: illegible
8
N: illegible
TIBETAN EDITION
9 P: ngas
10 P, N, G: bltos
11
¹¹ D, C: po; TKK (2001: 6): po
12
N: illegiblede dag gi grangs dang mtshan nyid dang yul dang | bdag gam gzhan
nam gnyi ga 'am rgyu med pa las skye zhes bya bar yang ga la 'gyur
te | 'di dag thams cad ni kho bo cag gis brjod par bya ba ma yin pa [P
21b] zhig go
§84. gal te de ltar khyod la nges pa yod pa ma yin na khyed cag gi
dngos po rnams ni bdag las ma yin gzhan las min gnyis las ma yin
rgyu med min zhes bya ba'i nges pa'i rang bzhin gyi ngag 'di ji ltar
dmigs she na
brjod par bya ste | nges¹ par gyur pa'i ngag 'di ni rang la² grub pa’i³
'thad [D 196] pa'i sgo nas 'jig rten la yod kyi | 'phags pa rnams la ni ma
yin no || [G 25b]
§85. ci 'phags pa rnams la rigs pa mi mnga' 'am zhe na
yod pa 'am med pa 'di sus smras | 'phags pa rnams kyi don dam pa ni
cang¹ mi gsung5 ba yin te de'i phyir gang laº 'thad pa dang 'thad pa
ma yin pa mi mnga' bar 'gyur ba de dag la spros pa mnga' bar ga la
'gyur ||
¹ C: des
2
² N: illegible
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§86. gal te 'phags pa rnams 'thad pa' gsung bar mi mdzad na | da ni ci
zhig gis 'jig rten pas¹ don dam pa khong du chud par mdzad ce na
3
455
N: illegible
4 C: cad
5 N: gsungs
"N: phyir gang la illegible
7
G: par456
'phags pa rnams² ni 'jig rten gyi³ tha snyad kyisª 'thad pa mi gsung³
gi'on kyang 'jig rten kho na la rab tu grags pa'i 'thad pa gang yin pa
de dag gzhan rtogs par bya ba'i phyir zhal gyis bzhes nas de nyid kyis
'jig rten khong du chud par mdzad do || ji ltar lus la mi gtsang ba7 [N
21b] nyid yod du zin kyang phyin ci log gi rjes su song ba'i 'dod chags
can rnams kyis dmigs par mi 'gyur zhing yang dag pa ma yin yang
|
gtsang ba'i rnam par sgro btags³ nas yongs su nyon mongs par 'gyur
ro || de dag 'dod chags dang bral bar bya ba'i phyir de bzhin gshegs
pa'i sprul pa 'am lhas | lus 'di la skra zhes bya ba la sogs pas sngarº
gtsang ba'i 'du shes kyis bkab pa'i lus kyi¹¹ skyon rnams nye bar
ston par byed do || de dag kyang gtsang ba'i 'du shes de dang bral bas
'dod chags dang bral ba thob par 'gyur ba [PSP₁ 58] de bzhin¹2 du 'di
so so'i skye bo dag kyang ma rig¹4 pa'i rab rib kyis [℃ 19b] blo
gros kyi mig nyams pa nyid kyis dngos po rnams kyi rang bzhin
phyin ci log [P 22a] 'phags pa rnams kyis rnam pa thams cad du ma
10
na ¹3
¹ TKK (2001: 8): em. pa la. 'jig rten pa can be understood as the agent of khong du
chud pa
N: illegible
3 P, N, G: gyis
4 P, N, G: kyi
5 N: gsungs
6P, N, G: khung
7 N: mi gtsang ba illegible
2
8
N: brtags
9 D: sdar
10 N: gtsad
TIBETAN EDITION
11 P, N, G: kyis
12
N: illegible
13 P, N, G: nas
14
¹4 P: rigsdmigs pa'i bdag nyid can dang [G 26a] | 'ga' zhig tu khyad par 'ga'
zhig¹ lhag par sgro btags nas ches² shin tu nyon mongs par 'gyur te
de dag da ltar³ 'phags pa rnams kyis bum pa yod pa 'jim¹ pa la sogs
pa dag las skye ba ma yin no zhes khas blangs pa de bzhin du skyes
pa'i snga rol nas yod pa la yang skye ba yod pa ma yin te | yod³ pa'i
phyir ro zhes bya bar nges par gyis shig yang ji ltar me dang sol ba
|
la sogs pa gzhan du gyur pa dag las myu gu skye ba yod pa ma yin no
zhes [D 20a] bya bar khas blangs pa de bzhin du sa bon la sogs pa
brjod par 'dod pa dag las kyang yod pa ma yin no zhes nges par gyis
shig ||
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§87. ci ste yang ’di ni kho bo cag gis nyams su myong ba yin no
snyam na 'di yang mi rigs te |
|
'di ltar nyams su myong ba ni brdzun' pa'i don can yin te nyams su
myong ba yin pa'i phyir rab rib can gyis zla ba gnyis nyams su
myong ba bzhin no || de’i phyir nyams su myong ba yang bsgrub par
bya ba dang mtshungs pa nyid yin pa'i phyir des phyir' bzlog par¹⁰
10
¹ N: khyad par 'ga' zhig illegible
2 Em.: ches. P, N, G, D, C: chos
3 P, N, G: Ita
4 N: 'dzim
5 N: pa ma yin te | yod illegible
6 N: le?
7P, N, G: rdzun
8N: gyi
9 P, N, G: om. des phyir
10
457
C: y
yar458
rigs¹ pa ma yin no zhes de dag la grags pa nyid kyis khong du chud
par mdzad pa yin no ||
$88. de'i phyir dngos po rnams skye ba med pa yin no || de ltar re zhig
de'i rang bzhin phyin ci² log [N 22a] lhag par sgro btags pa'i gnyen por
rab tu byed pa dang po brtsams pa yin no || de nas khyad par 'ga' zhig
'ga' zhig tu sgro btags pa'i khyad par de bsal³ bar bya ba'i phyir rab
tu byed pa lhag ma brtsams pa yin terten cing 'brel par 'byung ba la
'gro bat po dang | bgrod par [G 26b] bya ba dang 'gro ba³ la sogs paº
khyad par ro cog ma lus pa yang yod pa ma yin no zhes bstan par bya
ba'i don du'o ||
§89. ci ste tshad ma dang gzhal bya'i tha snyad 'jig rten pa 'di nyid'
kho bo cag gi bstan bcos su [P 22b] brjod pa yin no snyam na | ’o na ni
de brjod pa'i dgos pa bsnyad par bya dgos so ||
§90. gal te rtog ge pa dag gis mtshan nyid phyin ci log [PSP₁ 59] brjod
pas de brlag par byas pas kho bo cag gis de'i mtshan nyid yang dag
par brjod pa yin no zhe na
TIBETAN EDITION
'di yang mi [C 20a] rigs te | gal te 'jig rten la rtog ge ngan pas mtshan
nyid phyin ci log brjod pas byas pa'i mtshon bya phyin ci log yod par
¹ N: rig
2
² N: phyin ci illegible
3
N: gsal
4 P, N, G: ba dang
5
D: bar bya ba
6
C: ma
7N: nyid niPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
'gyur na ni de'i¹ don du 'bad ba 'bras bu dang bcas par 'gyur ba zhig
na | de ni de ltar yang ma yin pas 'bad pa 'di don med pa nyid do ||
§91. gzhan yang gal te gzhal bya rtogs pa tshad ma la rag las pa yin
na² | tshad ma de dag gang gis yongs su gcod par byed ces bya ba la
sogs pa rtsod pa³ bzlog pa las bshad pa'i skyon de ma spangs pas
yang dag pa'i mtshan nyid gsal bar byed pa nyid kyang yod pa ma yin
no ||
459
§92. gzhan yang gal te rang dang spyi'i* mtshan nyid gnyis kyi dbang
gis tshad' ma gnyis [D 206] smrasº na ni | ci mtshan nyid de gnyis gang
la yod pa'i mtshan gzhi de yod dam 'on te med gal te yod na ni de'i
tshe de dag las gzhan' pa’i³ gzhal bya yod pas ji ltar tshad ma gnyis
yin | 'on te mtshan gzhi med na ni de'i tshe rten med pasº mtshan nyid
kyang yod pa ma yin pas¹⁰ ji ltar tshad ma gnyis su [G 27a] 'gyur te |
mtshan nyid 'jug pa ma yin na||
mtshan gzhi 'thad par mi 'gyur ro ||
mtshan gzhi 'thad pa ma yin na ||
¹P, N: di'i
2 N: om.
3 P, N: om. rtsod pa
4 P: sbyi'i
5
Em.: tshad. P, N, G, D, C: mtshan
6D, C: smra
7D, C: om.
8D, C: om.
9
⁹ P: pas ni
10 P, N, G: pa460
TIBETAN EDITION
mtshan nyid kyang ni yod ma yin ||
zhes 'chad par 'gyur ro || [PSP₁ 60]
§93. ci ste yang 'dis [N 226] mtshon par byed pas ni mtshan nyid ma
yin gyi'o na ci zhe na | byed pa dang lu ța¹ ni phal che'o zhes bya
bas las la lyuṭa² byas nas 'di mtshon par bya bas na mtshan nyid yin
no snyam na
de lta na yang de nyid kyis mtshon par bya ba nyid du mi srid pa’i
phyir gang gis de mtshon par byed pa'i byed pa de dang las tha dad
pa yin pa'i phyir nyes pa de nyid du 'gyur ro || [P 23a]
§94. ci ste shes pa byed pa yin pa'i phyir la | de yang rang gi mtshan
nyid kyi khongs su 'du ba'i phyir nyes pa 'di med do snyam na |
bshad par bya stere zhig 'dir ji ltar des de³ mtshon par byed pas¹ sa'i
sra ba dang | tshor ba'i myong ba dang | rnam par shes pa'i yul so sor
rnam par rig pa ltar bdag nyid kyi rang gi ngo bo gzhan dang thun
mong ma yin pa gang yin pa de ni rang gi mtshan nyid yin na | rab tu
grags pa dang rjes su 'brel pa'i [℃ 206] bye brag tu bshad pa bor nas |
las su sgrub pa khas len zhing rnam par shes pa byed pa'i ngo bor
rtogs pas ni rang gi mtshan nyid kho na las nyid yin zhing | rang gi
mtshan nyid gzhan ni byed pa’i ngo bo³ yin no zhes bya ba 'di smras
par 'gyur ro [PSP₁ 61] || de la gal te rnam par shes pa'i rang gi mtshan
5
¹P, G: lu tā; N: lu tā
2 P, G: lu tā; N: lu tā
³ TKK (2001: 16, n. 1) states that N omits de but N attests it.
4 N, C: pa'i
N: bo nyidPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
nyid byed pa yin na ni | de la tha dad par gyur pa’i las shig yod par
'gyur dgos pas nyes pa de nyid du 'gyur ro ||
461
§95. ci ste sa la sogs par [G 27b] gtogs pa’i sra ba la sogs¹ pa rnam par
shes pas rtogs par bya ba gang yin pa de ni de'i las yin la| de yang
rang gi mtshan nyid las tha dad pa ma yin no snyam na
de Ita na ni 'o na rnam par shes pa'i rang gi mtshan nyid las ma yin
pa'i phyir gzhal bya nyid du mi 'gyur te | las kyi rang bzhin gyi rang
[D 21a] gi mtshan nyid kho na gzhal bya yin pa'i phyir ro || de'i phyir
gzhal bya ni rnam pa gnyis te | rang gi mtshan nyid dang spyi'i
mtshan nyid do zhes bya bar rang gi mtshan nyid cung zad cig ni
gzhal bya yin te | mtshon par bya bas na zhes² de Itar bsnyad pa gang
yin pa'o || cung zad cig ni gzhal bya ma yin te 'dis mtshon par byed
pas na zhes brjod pa gang yin pa'o zhes khyad par 'di tsam zhig brjod
par bya dgos so || ci ste de³ yang las su [N 23a] sgrub pa yin na ni | de'i
tshe de la byed pa gzhan zhig yod par bya dgos la shes [P 236] pa
gzhan zhig byed pa'i ngo bor rtogª na yang thug pa med pa'i skyon
du 'gyur ro ||
1
§96. ci ste rang rig pa yod de des na rang rig pas des 'dzin pa'i phyir
las nyid' yin dang | gzhal bya'i khongs su 'du ba yod pa yin no snyam
du sems na
D: sags
P: zhis
3 P, N, G: without de
4 D, C: rtogs
5
Em. de. P, N, G: des; D, C: add preceding des. TKK (2001: 18): as D
6P, N, G: om. nyid462
bshad par bya ste | dbu ma la 'jug pa las rang rig pa rgyas par bkag
pa'i phyir rang gi mtshan nyid ni [PsP₁ 62] rang gi mtshan nyid gzhan
gyis mtshon par byed pa¹ la | de yang rang rig pa des mtshon par byed
do zhes bya ba ni rigs pa ma yin no || gzhan yang shes pa de yang mi
srid pa'i phyir rang gi mtshan nyid las tha dad par ma grub la | mtshan
gzhi med na rten med pa’i mtshan [G 28a] nyid 'jug pa med pa'i phyir
rnam pa thams cad du yod pa ma yin pas rang rig pa ga la yod |
|
de skad du yang 'phags [C21a] pa gtsug na rin po ches zhus pa las
¹ P, N, G: om. pa
2 D, C: du
3
TIBETAN EDITION
de sems yang dag par rjes su ma mthong bas | sems gang las
byung zhes sems kyi rgyun kun tu² tshol zhing de 'di snyam du
sems te dmigs pa yod pa las sems 'byung bar³ 'gyur ro snyam
mode yang 'di snyam du sems te ci dmigs pa de yang gzhan
la sems de yang gzhan nam 'on te dmigs pa gang yin pa de
nyid sems yin gal te re³ zhig dmigs pa yang gzhan la sems
kyang gzhan na ni sems de gnyis su 'gyur ro || 'on te dmigs pa
gang yin pa de nyid sems yin na ni sems kyis6 sems de ji ltar
mthong bar 'gyur te | sems kyis' sems de mthong bar mi rung
ngo || 'di Ita ste dper na ral gri'i so de nyid kyis ral gri'i so de
nyid [PSP₁ 63] bcad [D 216] par mi nus pa dang | sor mo'i rtse mo
de nyid gyis sor mo'i rtse mo de nyid la reg par mi nus pa de
D: par
4 C: 'did
5
N: reg
6P, N, G: kyi
7N: kyiPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
bzhin du sems de nyid kyis sems de nyid mthong bar mi nus
so snyam nas de 'di ltar tshul bzhin rab tu sbyor ba la | gang
sems mi gnas pa| chad pa ma yin pa | rtag¹ pa ma yin [P 24a] pa |
ther zug tu mi gnas pa | rgyu med pa ma yin pa² | rkyen dang mi
'gal ba | [N 236] de las kyang ma yin pa³ | gzhan las kyang ma yin
pa | de nyid kyang ma yin paª gzhan yang ma yin pa’i sems kyi
rgyud sems kyi 'khri shing sems kyi chos nyid sems kyi mi
gnas pa dang sems kyi³ rgyu ba med pa dang | sems snang ba
med pa [G 28b] dang sems kyi rang gi mtshan nyid de ji ltar de
bzhin nyid 'khrug par mi byed pa de Itar shes so || de Itar
mthong ngo || de bzhin nyid ji lta ba de bzhin du sems de dag
dben pa nyid du rab tu shes7 | de bzhin du mthong ba 'di ni rigs
kyi bu byang chub sems dpa'i sems la sems kyi rjes su lta ba’i
dran pa nye bar gzhag pa'i spyod pa yongs su dag pa'o zhes
gsungs so ||
463
de'i phyir de Itar rang rig pa med la de med pas gang zhig gang gis
mtshon par byed |
§97. gzhan yang mtshan nyid de mtshan gzhi las tha dad par 'gyur
ram tha mi dad par 'gyur grang | [℃ 216] de la gal te re zhig tha dad pa
¹ P, N, G: brtag
2 D, C: om.
³ P, N, G: om.; C: la
4 P, N, G: om.
5 D, C: om.
6
N: unclear, appears to be missing
7
G: adds following te464
TIBETAN EDITION
yin na ni de'i tshe¹ mtshan gzhi las tha dad pa'i phyir mtshan nyid
ma yin pa bzhin du mtshan nyid kyang mtshan nyid ma yin par 'gyur
la | mtshan nyid las tha dad pa'i phyir mtshan gzhi yang mtshan gzhi
ma yin pa² ltar mtshan gzhir mi 'gyur ro [PSP₁ 64] || de bzhin du mtshan
nyid mtshan gzhi³ las tha dad pa'i phyir mtshan gzhi mtshan nyid la
ltos¹ pa med par yang 'gyur te de'i phyir de mtshan gzhi ma yin te |
mtshan nyid la ltos³ pa med pa'i phyir nam mkha’i me tog bzhin no ||
ci ste mtshan nyid dang mtshan nyid kyi gzhi dag tha mi dad paº yin
na ni de'i tshe mtshan nyid las tha mi dad pa'i phyir | mtshan nyid
kyi rang gi bdag nyid bzhin du mtshan gzhi’i mtshan gzhi nyid
nyams par 'gyur ro|| mtshan gzhi las tha mi dad pa'i phyir mtshan
nyid kyang mtshan nyid [P 246] kyi rang bzhin du mi 'gyur te mtshan
gzhi'i rang gi bdag nyid bzhin no ||
ji skad du | [D 22a]
mtshan nyid [G 29a] mtshan gzhi las gzhan na ||
mtshan gzhi de mtshan med par 'gyur ||
tha dad med na de dag ni ||
med par khyod kyis gsal bar bstan ||
¹ P, N, G: om.
2 N: par
3 N: gzhin
4P, N, G: bltos
5 P, N, G: bltos
6D, C: pa nyid
7P, N, G: kyi phyirde skad du [N 24a]
zhes bshad do || de nyid dang gzhan nyid las ma gtogs par mtshan
gzhi dang mtshan nyid 'grub pa'i thabs gzhan yod pa yang ma yin te |
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
gang dag dngos po gcig pa dang ||
dngos po gzhan pa nyid du ni ||
'grub par 'gyur ba yod min na ||
de gnyis grub pa ji ltar yod ||
1
ces 'chad par 'gyur ro ||
§98. ci ste brjod du med pa nyid du 'grub par 'gyur ro zhe na
de ni 'di ltar ma yin te | phan tshun rnam par dbye ba yongs su shes
pa med pa yin na | brjod du med pa nyid ces bya bar 'gyur na | gang
na rnam par dbye¹ ba yongs su shes par 'gyur ba med pa der ni 'di ni
mtshan nyid do|| 'di ni mtshan gzhi'o zhes khyad par du yongs su
gcod pa med pas gnyi ga yang med pa nyid de² de'i phyir brjod du
med pa nyid du yang grub³ pa med do4 ||
465
|
§99. gzhan yang gal te shes pa byed pa yin na yul yongs su gcod pa'i
byed pa po gang zhig yin | byed pa po med par [PSP₁ 65] byed pa la sogs
pa rnams [C 22a] yod pa yang ma yin te gcod pa'i bya ba bzhin no || ci
ste der sems la byed pa po nyid du rtog na | de yang rigs pa ma yin te |
C: dpye
2 N: nyid de illegible
³ P: 'grub
3
4 D, C: de466
TIBETAN EDITION
'di ltar don tsam lta ba ni sems kyi bya ba yin la don gyi khyad par Ita
ba ni sems las byung ba rnams kyi bya ba yin te |
de la don mthong rnam par shes ||
de yi khyad par¹ sems las byung ||
zhes khas blangs² pa'i phyir ro || byed pa la sogs pa rnams [G 29b] ni
bdag nyid ji lta bu’i bya ba phal pa sgrub pa’i sgo nas | gtso bor gyur
pa'i bya ba cig bsgrub par bya ba la yan lag gi ngo bor gyur pa las
byed pa la sogs [P 25a] pa nyid du 'gyur na 'dir ni shes pa dang³ rnam
par shes pa gnyis la gtso bor gyur pa'i bya ba gcig med do || 'o na ci
zhe na | rnam par shes pa'i gtso bor gyur pa'i bya ba ni don tsam
yongs su gcod pa yin la don gyi khyad par yongs su gcod pa ni shes
pa'i gtso bor gyur pa'i bya ba yin te des na shes pa byed pa nyid ma
yin la sems kyang byed pa po nyid ma [D 226] yin no || de'i phyir nyes
pa de nyid du 'gyur ro ||
§100. ci ste chos thams cad bdag med pa zhes bya ba'i lung las na
byed pa po rnam pa thams cad du med pa'i phyir bya ba la sogs pa'i
tha snyad ni byed pa po med kyang yod pa nyid do snyam na |
'di yang yod pa ma yin [N 246] teª | lung gi don yang dag par ma bzung
ba'i phyir ro || 'di yang dbu ma la³ 'jug pa las bstan zin to || [PsP₁ 66]
4
¹P, N, G: pas
2
TKK (2001: 24, n. 4) reports that N presents blang ba'i but it also reads blangs pa'i
³ D, C: om.
3
G: t illegible
5 D, C: om.; according to TKK (2001: 26, n. 2) N also omits la but la is attested§101. ci ste yang dper na mchi gu'i lus sgra gcan gyi¹ mgo zhes bya ba
la | lus dang mgo las tha dad pa'i khyad par med kyang khyad par
dang khyad par gyi gzhi'i dngos po yod pa de bzhin du | rang gi
mtshan nyid las tha dad pa'i sa² la sogs pa med kyang sa'i rang gi
mtshan nyid ces bya bar 'gyur ro snyam na |
¹ N: gyis
2P, N, G: las
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
de ni de ltar ma yin te | mi mtshungs pa'i phyir ro || lus dang mgo'i
sgra dag³ ni blo dang lag pa la sogs pa ltar lhan cig 'byung ba'i
dngos po gzhan la ltos³ pa dang bcas te 'jug pas | lus dang mgo'i sgra
tsam la dmigs pa'i blo skyes pa lta zhig gang gi' lus [G 30a] gang gi
mgo snyam du lhan cig spyod³ pa'i dngos po gzhan la re ba dang bcas
pa nyid du 'gyur la cig shos kyang khyad par gzhan' dang 'brel pa
bsal bar [℃ 226] 'dod pas 'jig rten pa'i brda'i rjes su byed pa khyad
|
par mchi gu dang sgra gcan gyi sgras rtogs pa po'i re ba sel bar byed
do zhes bya bar rigs¹⁰ | 'dir ni sra ba la sogs pa las tha dad pa’i sa la [P
25b] sogs pa med pas khyad par dang khyad par can gyi dngos po mi
rigs so ||
3 N: ngag
4 C: ba'i ba'i
5 P, N, G: bltos
6P, N, G: yi
7P, N, G: gis
467
8 Em.: spyod. P, N, G, D, C: dpyod
9
⁹ P, N, G: gzhag
1⁰ D, C: rigs na
10468
TIBETAN EDITION
§102. gal te mu stegs pa¹ dag gis mtshan gzhi tha dad par khas blangs
pa'i phyir de'i ngor khyad par brjod pa la skyon med do zhe na [PSP₁
67]
de ni de ltar ma yin te mu stegs pas kun tu brtags pa'i dngos po rigs
pa dang 'gal ba dag ni rang gi gzhung lugs la khas blang bar mi rigs
te | tshad ma gzhan la sogs pa khas blangs² par thal bar 'gyur ba’i
phyir ro ||
§103. gzhan yang lus kyi rten can khyad par du³ byed pa 'jigs rten pa'i
tha snyad kyi yan lag tu gyur pa ma brtags na grub pa rten pa po mchi
gu dang mgo'i rten can brten pa po sgra gcan ni gang zag la sogs par
brtags pa ltar yod [D 23a] pa'i phyir dpe 'di rigs pa ma yin no ||
§104. gal te de tsam zhig dmigs pas lus dang mgo las tha dad pa'i don
gzhan ma grub pa'i phyir dpe grub pa nyid do zhe na |
de ni de ltar ma yin te | 'jig rten pa'i [N 25a] tha snyad la de ltar rnam
par dpyod pa mi 'jug pa'i phyir dang | 'jig rten pa'i dngos po rnams ni
ma brtags par yod pa'i phyir ro || ji ltar rnam par dpyad na gzugs la
sogs pa las tha dad par bdag med mod kyi | [G 30b] 'on kyang phung po
la brten nas 'jig rten gyi kun rdzob tu 'di yod pa nyid yin pa de bzhin
du | sgra gcan dang mchi gu gnyis kyang yin pas dpe grub pa med
do || de bzhin du rnam par dpyadª na sa la sogs pa dag la yang sra ba
la sogs pa las tha dad pa'i mtshan gzhi med la mtshan gzhi las tha
1 C: om.
2 P, N, G: blang bar for blangs par
³ P, N, G: khyad par
4 P: dbyadPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
dad par rten med pa'i mtshan nyid kyang med¹ mod kyi | de lta na
yang 'di ni kun rdzob tu yod de | de bas na slob dpon rnams kyis phan
tshun ltos² pa tsam gyis grub pa'i sgo nas grub par rnam par gzhag³
pa mdzad do || 'di ni de kho na ltar gdon mi za bar khas blang bar bya
ste de lta ma yin na kun rdzob [PSP₁ 68] 'thad pa dang ldan pa ma yin
nam | [P 26a] des na 'di deª kho³ na nyid du 'gyur gyi kun rdzob tu mi
'gyur ro | 'thad pas rnam par dpyad pa na mchi gu la sogs pa dag kho
na mi srid pa ni ma yin te | 'o na ci zhe na | 'chad [C 23a] par 'gyur ba'i
'thad pas gzugs dang tshor ba la sogs pa rnams kyang yod pa ma yin
pas | de dag kyang mchi gu la sogs pa bzhin du kun rdzob tu yod pa
ma yin pa nyid du khas blangs par 'gyur na de Itar yang ma yin pas |
'di ni yod pa ma yin no || brten nas btags' par rnam par gzhag³ pa 'di
yang dbu ma la 'jug pa las rgyas par bstan' pas de nyid las yongs su
btsal bar bya'o ||
¹P, N, G: yod
2 P, N, G: bltos
³ P, N, G: bzhag
4 P, N, G: na
5
C: do for de kho
469
§105. ci ste zhib mor dpyad pa 'dis ci zhig bya ste | kho bo cag tshad
ma dang gzhal bya'i tha snyad thams cad bden pa yin no zhes ni mi
smra'i | 'on kyang 'jig rten la¹⁰ rab tu grags pa 'di tshul 'dis rnam par
'jog par byed par 'gyur ro snyam na
10
6D, C: om. ma
7
Em.: btags. P, N, G, D, C: brtags
8P, N, G: bzhag
9
⁹P, N, G: brtan
10
TKK (2001: 32, n. 4) reports that N omits la but it is attested (below the line).470
TIBETAN EDITION
bshad par bya ste | [G 31a] dpyad pa zhib mo'jig rten pa'i tha snyad la
bcug pa 'dis ci dgos¹ zhes kho bo cag kyang de skad du smra ste | kun
rdzob [D 236] phyin ci log tsam gyis bdag gi ngo bo [N 25ы] yod par
rnyed pa thar pa 'dod pa rnams kyi thar pa 'dren par byed pa'i dge
baʼi [PsP₁ 69] rtsa ba gsog² pa'i rgyur gyur pa 'di ni ji srid de kho na
nyid ma rtogs pa de srid du gnas par 'gyur³ mod | khyod ni don dam
pa dang kun rdzob kyi bden pa la mi mkhas pas la lar 'thad pa bcug
nas rigs pa ma yin pa las de 'jig par byed pa yin no || kho bo ni kun
rdzob kyi bden pa rnam par 'jog pa la mkhas pa'i phyir | 'jig rten pa’i
phyogs nyid la gnas te kun rdzob kyi phyogs gcig bsal ba'i phyir
bkod pa'i 'thad pa gzhan 'thad pa gzhan gyisª zlog par³ byed cing jig
rten gyi rgan rabs Itar | 'jig rten gyi chos lugs las nyams pa khyod kho
na zlog par byed pa yin gyi kun rdzob ni ma yin no || de'i phyir gal te
'jig rten pa'i tha snyad du yin na ni | [P 266] de’i tshe7 mtshan nyid
bzhin du mtshan gzhir yang8 gdon mi za barº 'gyur bar bya dgos te |
de'i phyir nyes pa de nyid du 'gyur ro || 'on te don dam par¹⁰ yin na ni
de'i tshe mtshan gzhi med pas mtshan nyid gnyis kyang med pas
tshad ma gnyis su ga la 'gyur |
¹ N:dgoso
2 D, C: sog
3 P, N, G: gyur
4 C: gyi
5
N: zlog par illegible
6P, N, G: bzlog
7N: illegible
8 C: yad
9 N: za bar illegible
10 P, N, G: pa§106. ci ste sgra rnams la bya ba dang byed pa po'i 'brel par¹ sngon
du 'gro ba can gyi bye brag tu bshad pa de lta bu khas len par mi
byed do zhe na
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
'di ni shin tu dka' ste khyod [C 23b] bya ba dang byed pa po'i 'brel
pas rab tu zhugs pa'i sgra de dag kho nas tha snyad byed cing | bya ba
dang byed pa po la sogs pa'i sgra'i don yang² mi 'dod pas | [G 31b] e
ma kyi hud khyod ni 'dod pa tsam la rag las te 'jug pa nyid do ||
§107. gang gi tshe de ltar gzhal bya gnyis gnas pa med pa de'i tshe
lung la sogs pa rang dang spyi'i mtshan nyid kyi yul can ma yin pa
nyid kyi sgo nas tshad ma gzhan nyid ma yin pa ma yin no ||
471
§108. gzhan yang bum pa mngon sum mo zhes bya ba de Ita bu la
sogs pa 'jig rten pa'i tha snyad ma bsdus³ pa'i phyir dang | 'phags pa
ma yin pa'i tha snyad khas blangs pa'i phyir mtshan nyid ma khyab
pa nyid du 'gyur te des na 'di ni mi rigs so || [PSP₁ 70]
¹P, N, G: pa
2 C: par
§109. ci ste bum pa'i nye bar len pa sngon po la sogs pa dag ni mngon
sum [N 26a] gyi tshad mas yongs su gcad par bya ba yin pa'i phyir
mngon sum yin te de'i phyir ji ltar rgyu la 'bras [D 24a] bu btags pa
byas te sangs rgyas rnams ni 'byung ba bde zhes bsnyad pa de
bzhin du sngon po la sogs pa mngon sum du gyur pa’i rgyu can gyi
3
P: bsdu
4
TKK (2001: 34, n. 4) reports that D reads bad but it too attests bde
5 P, N, G: snyad472
TIBETAN EDITION
bum pa yang 'bras bu la rgyu¹ btags pa byas nas mngon sum zhes bya
bar brjod do snyam² na
rnam pa de lta bu’i yul la ni btags pa mi rigs te³ | 'byung ba ni 'jig
rten na bde ba las tha dad par dmigs la de yang 'dus byas kyi mtshan
nyid kyi rang bzhin yin pa'i phyir dang | dka' ba brgya phrag du ma’i
rgyu can yin pa'i phyir bde ba ma yin pa nyid do || de la bde ba [P 27a]
zhes brjod pa na 'brel pa med pa nyid yin pas rnam pa de lta bu’i yul
la nye bar btags pa rigs na | bum pa mngon sum zhes bya ba 'dir ni
gang zhig btagsª nas mngon sum nyid du 'gyur ba bum pa zhes bya
ba mngon sum ma yin pa logs shig tu dmigs pa yang ma yin no ||
§110. gal te sngon po la [G 32a] sogs pa las tha dad pa'i bum pa med
pa'i phyir btags pa'i mngon sum nyid du 'gyur ro zhe na |
de Ita na yang ches shin tu btags par mi rigs te | gzhi gdags bya med
ba'i phyir ro || bong bu'i rwa la rnon po nye bar 'dogs pa ni³ ma yin
no ||
§111. gzhan yang gal te 'jig rten gyi tha snyad kyi yan lag tu gyur pa’i
bum pa sngon po la sogs pa las tha dad par gyur pa med pa'i phyir | [C
24a] de nye bar btags pa pa'i mngon sum nyid du rtog7 na ni de lta na
ni sngon po la sogs pa yang sa la sogs pa las tha dad pa med pas
¹D, C: rgyus
2
TKK (2001: 34, n. 7) reports that N reads bsnyam but it also attests snyam.
P: t illegible
4 D, C: brtags
3
5 D, C: add following rigs pa; TKK (2001: 36): ni rigs pa
6 TKK (2001: 36): em. btags pa'i; cf. Negi s.v. nye bar btags pa pa
7D, C: rtogsji skad du | [PsP₁ 71]
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
sngon po la sogs pa yang btags pa pa'i¹ mngon sum nyid du rtogs
shig |
ji ltar gzugs sogs ma gtogs par ||
bum pa yod pa² ma yin pa ||
de bzhin rlung la sogs pa ni ||
ma gtogs³ gzugs kyang yod ma yin ||
zhes bshad do de'i phyir de lta bu la sogs pa'i 'jig rten gyi tha snyad
ni mtshan nyid kyis ma bsdus pa'i phyir mtshan nyid ma khyab paª
nyid do || de kho na nyid gzigs pa la [N 266] ltos³ nas ni bum ba la sogs
pa dang sngon po la sogs pa rnams mngon sum nyid du mi 'dod do ||
'jig rten gyi kun rdzob tu ni bum pa la sogs pa rnams mngon sum
nyid du khas blang bar bya ba kho na'o ||
ji skad du bzhi7 brgya pa las |
gzugs mthong [D 24b] tshe na bum pa ni ||
thams cad kho na mthong mi 'gyur ||
bum pa mngon sum zhes bya 'ang ||
de nyid rig¹ pa su zhig smra ||
473
¹ TKK (2001: 36): em. btags pa'i; cf. Negi s.v. nye bar btags pa pa
2 P, N, G: par
3 P, N: grtogs
4 D: ba
5 P, N, G: bltos
6P, N, G: blangs
7P, N, G: om.474
rnam par dpyad pa 'di nyid kyis ||
blo mchog Idan pas dri zhim dang ||
mngar dang 'jam pa thams cad [G 32b] dag ||
so sor dgag par [P 27b] bya ba yin ||
zhes bshad do ||
TIBETAN EDITION
§112. gzhan yang mngon sum gyi sgra ni lkog tu ma gyur pa'i don gyi
rjod par byed pa yin pa'i phyir | dbang po mngon du phyogs pa'i don
ni mngon sum yin no || 'di la dbang po mngon du phyogs pas zhes
byas² nas bum pa dang sngon po la sogs pa³ lkog tu ma gyur pa rnams
mngon sum nyid du grub par 'gyur la de yongs su gcod par byed
[PSP₁ 72] pa'i shes pa ni rtswa³ dang sogº ma’i me bzhin du mngon sum
gyi rgyu can yin pa'i phyir mngon sum nyid du rjod par byed do ||
§113. gang zhig dbang po dang dbang po so so la 'jug pas zhes bya bas
mngon sum gyi sgra bye brag tu 'chad par byed pa de' ltar na ni shes
pa ni dbang po'i yul can ma yin pa'i phyir dang | yul gyi yul can yin
pa'i phyir bye brag tu bshad pa mi rigs par 'gyur te | yul so so ba 'am
don so so ba nyid ces bya bar ni mi 'gyur ro ||
¹P, N, G: rigs
² D, C: bya ba
3 P, N, G: pas
4 P: gyur
5 P, N, G: rtsa
6P, N, G: sogs
7P, N, G: de'i§114. ci ste ji ltar rnam par shes pa 'byung ba gnyi ga la rag las pa yin
yang rnam par shes pa rnams rten gsal ba [C 24¹] dang zhan pa'i rjes su
byed pa'i phyir dang | de dag 'gyur¹ na 'gyur ba'i phyir | mig gi rnam
par shes pa zhes rten nyid kyis ston par 'gyur ba de bzhin du don
dang don so so la 'jug mod kyi de lta na yang dbang po dang dbang
po la brten nas 'jug pa'i rnam par shes pa ni rten² gyis bstan³ pas
mngon sum nyid du 'gyur te4 | rnga’i sgra nas kyi myu ku zhes thun
mong ma yin pa'i rgyus ston³ pa ni mthong ba yin no snyam na |
¹D, C: gyur
2 P, N, G: brten
3 N: brtan
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
10
'di ni snga ma dang mi 'dra ba yin te | der ni gzugs [N 27a] kyi rnam
par shes pa zhes bya ba de lta bu la sogs pas yul gyis rnam [G 33a] par
shes pa bstan na| rnam par shes pa drug gi dbye' ba ma bstan par
'gyur te yid kyi rnam par shes pa ni mig la sogs pa'i rnam par shes
pas dang lhan cig yul gcig' [PSP₁ 73] la 'jug¹0⁰ pa'i phyir ro || 'di Itar
sngon po la sogs pa'i rnam par shes pa drug la rnam par shes pa zhes
[P 28a] brjod [D 25a] na ni | ci rnam par shes pa 'di dbang po gzugs can
las skyes pa zhig gam | 'on te yid las byung ba zhig ces shes pa re ba
dang bcas pa nyid¹¹ du 'gyur la rten gyis bstan na ni yid kyi¹² rnam
4 C: gyi
5 P: stong
6D, C: gyi
7 D, C: rnam par dbye ba; TKK (2001: 40) as D
8 P: pa blurred
⁹P, N, G: cig
10 D: 'dug
475
¹¹ Em.: nyid. P, N, G, D, C: yid. PsP Skt: eva.
12 P, N, G: kyis476
par shes pa mig la sogs pa'i rnam par shes pa'i yul la 'jug pa yin yang
phan tshun dbye ba grub par 'gyur ro || 'dir ni tshad ma’i mtshan nyid
brjod par 'dod pas rtog¹ pa dang bral ba tsam zhig mngon sum nyid
du khas blangs pas rnam par rtog pa las 'di khyad par du mngon par
'dod pa'i phyir| thun mong ma yin pa'i rgyus bstan pa la dgos pa
cung zad kyang” ma mthong ngo || tshad ma’i grangs su ’jug pa gzhal
bya'i gzhan gyi dbang yin pa'i phyir dang | gzhal bya’i rnam pa'i rjes
su byed pa tsam gyis rang gi ngo³ bo yod par rnyed pa'i tshad³ ma
dag gi rang gi ngo bo rnam par 'jog pa'i phyir dbang pos bstan pa
cung zad kyang mi mkho bas rnam pa thams cad du yul kho nas bstan
par rigs so||
§115. gal te 'jig rten na brjod par 'dod pa'i don la mngon sum gyi sgra
rab tu grags pa'i phyir dang | don so so zhes bya ba'i sgra ma grags
pa'i phyir rten kho nas [PSP₁ 74] bye brag tu bshad pa la rtenº par byed
do zhe na
bshad par bya ste | mngon sum gyi sgra 'di 'jig rten la grags pa ni yod
mod kyi de' ji ltar 'jig rten naº yin [G 336] pa de ltar [℃ 25a] ni kho bo
cag gis smras pa nyid do || 'jig rten pa'i don ji ltar gnas pa spangs nas
de bye brag tu 'chad par byed na ni rab tu grags pa'i sgra yang
¹ G, N:rtogs
2 G: om.
3 N: do
4
5
TIBETAN EDITION
N: yong
N: tshang
6P, N, G: brten
7
P: illegible
8P, N, G: om. naPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
477
spong bar 'gyur ro || de'i phyir mngon sum zhes bya ba de ltar mi
'gyur ro ||
§116. zlos pa'i don med pa'i phyir dbang po'i skad cig [ 27b] gcig gi¹
rten can mig gi rnam par shes pa gcig² mngon sum nyid du yang mi
'gyur la re re la mngon sum nyid med na ni mang po rnams la yang
mi 'gyur ro ||
§117. rtog pa dang bral ba'i shes pa nyid mngon sum nyid du khas
blangs pa'i phyir dang | des kyang [P 286] 'jig rten pa'i tha snyad byed
pa³ med pa'i phyir dang | 'jig rten pa'i tshad ma dang gzhal bya’i tha
snyad bshad par 'dod pa'i phyirª mngon sum tshad mar rtog pa ni don
med pa nyid du 'gyur ro ||
1
¹ P: gis
2 P, N, G: cig
3 C: po
4 D, C: phyir na
5 P, N, G, C: om. 'o
6C: 'ang
§118. mig gi rnam par shes pa [D 256] dang ldan pas sngon po shes kyi
sngon po'o³ snyam du ni ma yin no zhes bya ba'i lung yang mngon
sum gyi mtshan nyid brjod pa'i don can gyi skabs ma yin pa nyid kyi
phyir dang dbang po'i rnam par shes pa lnga po [PSP₁ 75] rnams blun
pa nyid du ston par byed pa nyid yin pa'i phyir | lung las kyang rtog
pa dang bral ba’i rnam par shes pa kho na mngon sum nyid ma yin
pas 'di ni mi rigs so ||478
§119. de'i phyir gal te mtshan gzhi 'am rang gi mtshan nyid dam
spyi'i mtshan nyid kyang rung ste | 'jig rten na yod na ni thams cad
mngon sum du dmigs par bya ba yin pa'i phyir na lkog tu ma gyur pa
yin te de'i phyir de'i yul can gyi rnam par shes pa dang lhan cig tu
mngon sum nyid du rnam par gzhag¹ go || zla ba gnyis la sogs pa dag
ni rab rib can ma yin pa'i [G 34a] shes pa la ltos² nas mngon sum nyid
ma yin la | rab rib can la sogs pa la ltos³ nas ni mngon sum nyid kho
na'o ||
§120. lkog tu gyur pa'i yul can rtags¹ bsgrub par bya ba la mi 'khrul
ba las skyes pa'i shes pa ni rjes su dpag pa’o ||
TIBETAN EDITION
§121. dbang po las 'das pa'i don mngon sum du rigs cing yid ches par
gyur pa dag gi tshig gang yin pa de ni lung ngo ||
§122. 'dra ba las nyams su ma? myong ba'i don rtogs pa ni nye bar
'jal ba ste dper na ba men³ ni ba lang dang' [C 25b] 'dra'o snyam pa
Ita bu'o ||
§123. de'i phyir de¹ ltar tshad² ma bzhi las 'jig rten gyis³ don rtogs par
rnam parª 'jog pa yin no ||
¹P, N, G: bzhag
2 P, N, G: bltos
3 P, N, G: bltos
4
N: brtags
5 N: rigs
6P, N, G: gis
7
Em.: ma. P, N, G, D, C: om. ma. PsP Skt: ananubhūta
8D, C: man
⁹ P, N, G: om. dangde dag kyang phan tshun ltos³ pas 'grub par 'gyur te | tshad ma dag
yod na gzhal bya'i don dag tu 'gyur la | gzhal bya'i don dag yod na
tshad ma dag [N 28a] tu [P 29a] 'gyur gyi | tshad ma dang gzhal bya gnyis
ngo bo nyid kyis grub pa ni yod pa ma yin no || de'i phyir mthong ba
ji lta ba bzhin du 'jig rten pa nyid yin la rag ste | spros pas chog go ||
dkyus ma nyid bshad par bya'o || [PSP₁ 76]
10
§124. 'dir rang gi sde pa dag na re | gang 'di 'di skad du dngos po
rnams bdag las skye ba ma yin te zhes smras pa de ni rigs te rang
las skye ba don med pa'i phyir ro || gang yang gnyi ga las' skye ba ma
yin te zhes smras pa de yang rigs te | yan lag gcig ma tshangº ba’i
phyir ro || rgyu med pa'i phyogs ni shin tu tha chad [D 26a] yin¹⁰ pa'i
phyir de dgag pa yang rigs na | gang 'di skad du gzhan las skye ba
yang ma yin te zhes smras pa de ni rigs pa ma yin te gang gi phyir
bcom ldan 'das kyis [G 34b] gzhan du gyur pa dag kho na dngos po
rnams kyi skyed par byed par bstan pa'i phyir te
N: da
2 N: thad?
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
rkyen rnams¹¹ bzhi ste rgyu dang ni
dmigs pa dang ni de ma thag ||
³ D, C: gyi. TKK (2001: 44) as D
4 P, N, G: om. rnam par
5 P, N, G: bltos
6N: rab
7D, C: la
8 C: yang pa
9
⁹ C: tshad
10
479
N: om.
11 D, C, N: rnam480
bdag po yang ni de bzhin te ||
rkyen Inga pa ni yod ma yin || [MMK I.2] [PSP₁ 77]
TIBETAN EDITION
de la sgrub par byed pa ni rgyu yin no zhes bya ba'i mtshan nyid las
na gang zhig gang gi sgrub byed sa bon gyi ngo bor gnas pa de ni de'i
rgyu'i rkyen no || dmigs pa gang¹ gis skye bar 'gyur ba'i chos can
bskyed pa de ni de'i dmigs pa'i rkyen no || rgyu 'gag² ma thag pa ni
'bras bu 'byung ba'i rkyen yin te | dper na sa bon 'gag³ ma thag pa
myu gu 'byung ba'i rkyen yin pa bzhin no || gang zhig yod pas gang
'byung ba de ni de'i bdag po'o || 'di dag ni rkyen bzhi'o || gzhan gang
dag sngar skyes pa dang lhan cig skyes pa dang | phyis skye ba la
sogs pa de dag ni 'di rnams kyi khongs5 su 'dus pa yin no || dbang
phyug la sogs pa dag ni rkyen ma yin te | de nyid kyi phyir rkyen Inga
pa ni yod ma yin zhes nges par gzung ba yin no || de'i phyir gzhan du
gyur pa 'di dag [℗ 29b] las dngos po rnams skye ba’i phyir gzhan [C 26a]
las skye ba yod pa yin no zhes 'dzer to||
§125. de la bshad par bya ste dngos po rnams ni rkyen gzhan du gyur
pa dag las skye ba ma yin pa nyid deº | 'di ltar | [N 28b] [PsP₁ 78]
dngos po rnams kyi rang7 bzhin ni ||
rkyen la sogs la yod ma yin ||
¹ C: gad
2 Em.: 'gag. P, N, G, D, C: 'gags
3D, C: 'gags
4 C: gad
5 C: gams
6C: do
7P, N: dangbdag gi¹ dngos po yod² min na³ ||
gzhan dngos yod pa ma yin no || [MMK 1.3]
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
gal te 'bras bur gyur pa'i dngos po rnams rgyu la sogs pa'i rkyen
gzhan du gyur pa 'dus pa 'am so so³ ba 'am 'dus pa dang so so ba
dag gam | rgyu dang rkyen gyi tshogs pa las gzhan 'ga' zhig la yang
[G 35a] rung ste skyes pa'i snga rol tu' yod par gyur na ni | de dag las
skye bar 'gyur ba zhig na gang zhig skye ba'i snga rol tu³ yod par
|
'gyur ba de Itar yang ma yin te gal te yod par 'gyur na ni | gzung du
yod pa 'am skye ba don med par 'gyur ro || de'i phyir dngos po [D 26b]
rnams kyi rang bzhin ni rkyen la sogs pa dag la yod pa ma yin no ||
bdag gi dngos po yod pa ma yin pa nyid yin na gzhan gyi dngos po
yod pa ma yin no || 'byung bas na dngos po ste skye ba'o || gzhan gyi
dngos po ni gzhan dag las skye ba ste de yod pa ma yin no || de'i
phyir dngos po rnams gzhan du gyur pa dag las skye bo zhe bya ba
'di rigs pa ma yin no ||
1 N: gyis
2 N: yong
3 C: ni na
4 P, N: ba
5
§126. rnam pa gcig tu na rgyu med pa can du thal bar 'gyur ba'i phyir
myu gu la sogs pa 'bras bur gyur pa'i' dngos po rnams kyi rang bzhin
ni sa bon la sogs pa rkyen rnam par 'gyur ba med pa'i rang bzhin
N: sor
481
6C: 'a
7D, C: du
8 D, C: du
'P, N, G: ba'i482
TIBETAN EDITION
can dag yod pa na yod pa ma yin no || de'i phyir rkyen la sogs pa
rnams ci la ltos¹ nas gzhan nyid du 'gyur te | byams pa dang nyer sbas
dag ni yod pa gnyis kho na phan tshun ltos² pa'i gzhan nyid du 'gyur
na sa bon dang myu gu gnyis ni de ltar cig car ba ma yin no || de'i
phyir 'bras bu rnams [P 30a] kyi³ bdag gi dngos po yod pa ma yin na |
sa bon la sogs pa rnams la gzhan gyi dngos po te gzhan nyid yod pa
ma yin no || de'i phyir gzhan du bsnyad du med pa kho na'i phyir
gzhan las skye ba ma yin pas dngos po rnams gzhan las skye'o zhes
bya baʼdi ni mi rung ngo || [G 35b]
§127. de'i phyir gzhan gyi³ lung gi dgongs pa mngon par ma shes pa
nyid de de bzhin gshegs pa dag ni rigs pa dang 'gal [℃ 26b] ba'i ngag
mi gsung la lung gi dgongs pa yang gong du nye bar bstan zin to ||
[PSP₁ 79]
§128. de'i phyir de ltar rkyen dag las skye bar smra ba bkag pa yin
dang [N 29a] bya ba las skye bar smra ba ni mig dang gzugs la sogs
pa'i rkyen dag ni dngos su rnam par shes pa skyed par mi byed kyi ||
rnam par shes pa skye ba'i bya ba sgrub par byed pa'i phyir rkyen
zhes bya la | bya ba des kyang rnam par shes pa skyed' par byed de |
de'i phyir rnam par shes pa skye ba'i bya ba rkyen dang ldan pa ni
rnam par shes pa skyed par byed pa yin gyi rkyen dag ni ma yin te |
¹P, N, G: bltos
2P, N, G: bltos
3 P, N, G: ni
4 D, C: skye'i
5 C: kyi
6N: god
7N: skyePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
483
dper na 'bras chan¹ gyi 'tshed pa'i bya ba bzhin no snyam du sems
so ||
§129. bshad pa² |
bya ba rkyen dang ldan pa med || [MMK I.4a]
gal te bya ba 'ga' zhig yod par gyur na ni de mig la sogs pa'i rkyen
dag gis³ rkyen dang ldan pas rnam par shes pa skyed par [D 27a] byed
pa zhig na | yod pa ni ma yin no || ji ltar zhe na | 'dir bya ba 'di 'dod
pa na rnam par shes pa skyes zin pa la 'dod dam | ma skyes pa la¹ 'am
skye bzhin pa la yin grang na | de la skyes zin pa la³ mi rigs te | bya ba
ni dngos po sgrub par byed pa yin na dngos po grub par gyur na ni
de la bya bas ci zhig dgos te | 'di ni
skyes par gyur pa slar yang skye bar rigs pa 'ang' ma yin
nyid ||
ces bya ba la sogs pa dbu ma la 'jug pa las bstan pa yin no || ma skyes
pa la yang mi rigs te
skye ba 'di ni byed pa [P 30b] med par rigs pa’i ngo bo’ang min
[PSP₁ 80]
¹ D, C: chen
2 G: par
³ P, N, G: gi
4 P: om.
5 P, N, G: add following yang
6 D, C: add following 'gyur ba
7
Em: 'ang. P, N, G: 'am; D, C: om.; Skt: ca484
zhes bya ba la [G 36a] sogs pa 'byung ba'i phyir ro || dngos po skye
bzhin pa la yang bya ba srid pa ma yin te skyes pa dang ma skyes pa
las ma gtogs pa'i skye bzhin pa med pa'i phyir ro ||
ji skad du |
skye bzhin pa ni phyed skyes phyir ||
skye bzhin pa ni skye ba min ||
yang na thams cad skye bzhin pa ||
nyid ni yin par thal bar 'gyur ||
zhes gsungs so|| gang gi phyir de ltar dus gsum du skye ba’i bya ba
mi srid pa de'i phyir de ni yod pa' ma yin no || de nyid kyi phyir bya
ba rkyen dang ldan pa med ces gsungs te mo gsham² gyi bu ba
glang³ dang ldan no zhes ni brjod par bya ba ma yin no || 'di ni
khyad par med par khyad par can yod min ||
zhes bya ba la sogs pas4 dbu ma la 'jug pa las bstan pa nyid do || [C 27a]
§130. gal te de lta na | 'o na rkyen dang mi ldan par 'gyur ro zhe na |
[N 29b]
TIBETAN EDITION
§131. 'di yang rigs pa ma yin no zhes bshad pa ni
rkyen dang³ mi ldan bya ba med || [MMK I.4b]
¹ D, C: add following yang
2
G: bsham
3
³D, C: lang
4 C: pa
5 N: dadPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
485
gang gi tshe bya ba rkyen dang ldan pa med pa de'i tshe ji ltar rkyen
dang mi ldan pa rgyu med pa yod par 'gyur te snam bu snal maʼi
rang bzhin du mi rigs pas 'jag ma’i rang bzhin du khas len pa ni ma
yin no || de'i phyir bya ba dngos po’i skyed par byed pa ma yin no ||
§132. 'dir smras ba | gal te de Itar bya ba med na | 'o na ni rkyen dag
dngos po rnams kyi skyed par byed par 'gyur ro ||
§133. bshad par bya ste
bya ba mi ldan rkyen ma yin|| [MMK I.4c]
gang gi tshe bya ba med pa de'i tshe | rkyen bya ba dang bral ba dang
bya ba dang mi ldan pa rgyu¹ med pa rnams² ji ltar skyed par byed pa
yin |
§134. ji ste bya ba dang ldan pa dag kho na skyed par byed pa yin no
zhe na [D 27b]
¹ P: rgyud
2 N: illegible
³ D, C: yin na
bshad pa [PSP₁ 81]
|
bya ba [G 36b] ldan yod 'on te na || [MMK I.4d]
ma yin no zhes skabs dang sbyar ro|| 'on te na'i sgra ni nges par
gzung ba'o || de la bya ba med par bshad na rkyen rnams ji ltar bya
ba dang ldan ba nyid yin³ | ji ltar rnam [P 31a] par shes pa'i skye ba'i486
TIBETAN EDITION
bya ba la brjod pa de bzhin du 'tshed¹ pa'i bya ba la sogs pa'i dngos
po dag la yang brjod par rig par bya'o || des na bya ba las kyang
dngos po rnams skye ba med pas skye ba'i rjod par byed pa don gyis
stong par 'gyur ro ||
§135. 'dir smras pa| rkyen bya ba ldan no zhes bya ba la sogs pa'i
rnam par dpyad pa 'dis kho bo cag la ci dgos gang gi phyir mig la
sogs pa'i rkyen dag la brten nas dngos po rnam par shes pa la sogs pa
rnams skye bar 'gyur te de'i phyir mig la sogs pa rnams rkyen nyid
yin zhing | rnam par shes pa la sogs pa rnams kyang de dag las skye
ba yin no
§136. 'di yang rigs pa ma yin no zhes bshad pa
'di dag la brten skye bas na ||
de phyir 'di dag rkyen ces grag ||
ji srid mi skye de srid du ||
'di dag rkyen min ji ltar min || [MMK 1.5]
gal te mig la sogs pa'i rkyen rnams la brten nas rnam par shes pa skye
bas na 'di dag de'i rkyen zhes brjod na ni ji srid rnam par shes pa
zhes bya ba'i 'bras bu de mi skye ba de srid du mig la sogs pa 'di
dag rkyen ma [C 27b] yin pa ji ltar ma yin terkyen ma yin pa nyid do
snyam du dgongs pa'o || bye ma dag [N 30a] las til mar bzhin du rkyen
ma yin pa dag las ni skye ba yang ma yin no || [PSP₁ 82]
¹D, C: 'tshodPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
§137. ci ste sngar rkyen ma yin par gyur pa las rkyen gzhan ci zhig
cig¹ la ltos² nas rkyen nyid du 'gyur ro zhes bya [G 37a] bar 'dod na |
'di yang mi rung ste gang zhig rkyen ma yin pa 'di'i rkyen nyid du
rtog parkyen gzhan de'i rkyen nyid de yang rkyen yod na yin pas
'di la yang dpyad pa de nyid yin no || de'i phyir de ni mi rigs so ||
§138. gzhan yang mig la sogs pa 'di dag rnam par shes pa'i rkyen du
rtog pa na 'di yod pa 'am med pa zhig la rtog grang na| rnam pa
thams cad du mi rigs so zhes bya bar [P 31b] bshad pa |
med dam yod pa'i don la yang ||
rkyen ni rung ba ma yin te || [MMK I.6ab]
ci'i³ phyir zhe na bshad pa
487
med na gang gi rkyen du 'gyur ||
yod na rkyen gyis ci zhig bya || [MMK I.6cd]
med pa ste [D 28a] yod pa ma yin pa'i don la ni rkyen du ji ltar 'gyur
§139. gal te 'byung bar 'gyur bas ston par 'gyur ro zhe na de ltar ni
ma yin te
gal te 'byung bar 'gyur bas bsnyad 'dod na ||
nus pa med par 'di yi 'byung 'gyur med4 ||
¹P, N, G: gcig
2 P, N, G: bltos
3
³ D, C: add preceding de
4 D, C: ni || yod min488
ces bya ba la sogs pas nyes pa brjod pa'i phyir ro ||
§140. yod na ste bdog pa skye ba thob zin pa la yang rkyen yongs su
brtag pa¹ 'bras bu med pa nyid do || [PSP₁ 83]
TIBETAN EDITION
§141. de Itar rkyen 'dus pa rnams 'bras bu skyeď² par nus pa med pas
rkyen nyid ma yin par bsnyad nas | de'i 'og tu so so ba rnams rkyen
nyid ma yin par bstan par bya'o
§142. 'dir smras pa | gal te de Itar rkyen rnams mi srid mod kyi | de Ita
na yang mtshan nyid nye bar bstan pa las rkyen grub pa yod pa nyid
do || de la sgrub par byed pa ni³ rgyu'o zhes rgyu'i rkyen gyi mtshan
nyid brjod de yod pa ma yin pa mo gshamª gyi bu la ni mtshan nyid
nye bar ston pa mi brjod do ||
§143. gal te de'i mtshan nyid yod par gyur na ni | rgyu’i [G 376] rkyen
du 'gyur ba zhig na | yod pa ni ma yin te gang gi phyir |
gang tshe chos ni yod pa dang ||
med dang yod med mi 'grub pa ||
ji ltar sgrub byed rgyu zhes bya ||
de lta yin na mi rigs so || [MMK I.7]
de la sgrub par byed pa ni skyed par byed pa ste gal te bsgrub par [N
30b] bya ba'i chos 'grub na ni [C 28a] skyed par byed pa'i rgyus de
bskyed par 'gyur na 'grub pa yang ma yin te yod pa dang med pa
¹D, C: pas
2P, N, G: bskyed
³ P, N, G: pa'i for pa ni
4 G: bshamPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
dang gnyi ga la ngo bo 'grub pa med pa'i phyir ro || de la yod pa ni
'grub pa ma yin te yod pa'i phyir ro || med pa yang ma yin te yod pa
ma yin pa'i phyir ro || yod pa dang [P 32a] med pa yang ma yin te | phan
tshun 'gal ba’i don gcig med pa'i phyir dang | phyogs gnyi ga la brjod
pa'i skyon du 'gyur ba'i phyir ro || gang gi phyir de Itar 'bras bu skye¹
ba med pa de'i phyir rgyu'i rkyen yang yod pa ma yin no || de'i phyir
mtshan nyid yod pa'i phyir rgyu'i rkyen yod pa yin no zhes smras pa
gang yin pa ste² | de lta yin na mi rigs so ||
§144. da ni dmigs pa'i rkyen dgag³ pa'i phyir [PSP, 84]
|
yod pa'i chos 'di dmigs pa ni ||
med pa kho na nye bar bstan ||
ci ste chos ni dmigs med na ||
dmigs pa yod par ga la 'gyur || [MMK 1.8]
489
¹P, N, G: bskyed
2P, N, G: de
3 N:dgeg
4 N: 'ol
zhes gsungs so ||
'dir dmigs [D 286] pa dang bcas pa'i chos gang dag ce na | sems dang
sems las byung ba thams cad do zhes bya ba'i lung las ni sems dang
sems las byung ba rnams gzugs la sogs pa'i dmigs pa gang gis ci rigs
par skyed par byed pa de ni de dag gi dmigs pa'i rkyen yin pa na | yod
pa dag la brtag gam med pa dag la yin grang | de la [G 38a] yod pa dag
la ni dmigs pa'i rkyen de don med de chos bskyed par bya ba'i phyir
dmigs pa yongs su rtog par byed na de ni dmigs pa'i snga rol tu¹490
TIBETAN EDITION
yod pa nyid kyi phyir ro || ci ste de ltar chos rang gi bdag nyid dmigs
pa med par rab tu grub na | 'di ni dmigs pa dang ldan par brtags pas ci
zhig bya de'i phyir yod pa bdog pa'i chos sems la sogs pa 'di dmigs
pa med pa kho na khyed cag gis rang 'dod kyis² dmigs pa dang bcas
pa yin no zhes nye bar bstan pa 'ba' zhig tu zad kyi 'di la dmigs pa
dang ’brel pa cung zhig yod pa ni ma yin no ||
§145. ci ste med pa la dmigs pa yongs su rtog par byed na de yang
rigs pa ma yin te
chos 'di dmigs pa med [P 32¹] pa³ ni ||
yin pa kho nar nye bar bstan ||
zhes bya ba la sogs pa la 'di Itar yod [C 28b] pa [N 31a] ma yin pa la ni
dmigs pa dang 'brel paª yod pa ma yin no || [PsP₁ 85]
chos 'di dmigs pa med pa ni ||
yin pa ste gyur pa kho na khyeď³ kyis nye bar bstan te |
dmigs pa dang bcas par zhes bya ba ni tshig gi lhag ma’o ||
ci ste chos ni dmigs med na ||
dmigs pa yod par ga la 'gyur ||
¹D, C: du
2 D, C: kyi
3
Em: pa. P, N, G, D, C: par. See the immediately following citation of I.8a.
4 P, N: ba
5 D, C: khyodPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
zhes bya ba la ci ste'i sgra ni dri ba'o || ga la 'gyur zhes bya ba ni
gtan tshigs so || des na don ni | ci ste de ltar chos yod pa ma yin zhing
mi bdog pa ni dmigs pa med na | yang dmigs pa yod par ga la 'gyur
zhes bya ba 'dir 'gyur te | dmigs par byed pa med pa’i phyir dmigs pa
yang med do zhes bya bar dgongs pa'o ||
491
§146. ji ltar sems dang sems las [G 38b] byung ba rnams dmigs pa dang
bcas par 'gyur zhe na | mtshan nyid 'di ni kun rdzob pa yin gyi | don
dam pa ni ma yin pas nyes pa med do ||
§147. da ni mtshungs pa de ma thag pa'i rkyen dgag pa'i phyir
chos [D 29a] rnams skyes pa ma yin na ||
'gag pa 'thad par mi 'gyur ro ||
de phyir de ma thag mi rigs ||
'gags na rkyen yang gang zhig yin || [MMK 1.9] [PSP₁ 86]
1
G: bsnor for ba snor
zhes bya ba gsungs te
de la tshigs su bcad pa phyed phyi ma’i rkang pa go ba snor¹ bar blta
bar bya'o || yang gi sgra ni 'gags na yang zhes rim pa bzhin du sbyar
ro || des na 'di skad du | 'gags na rkyen yang gang zhig yin || de'i phyir
de ma² thag mi rigs zhes 'don par 'gyur te de skad du gsungs pa ni
tshigs su bead pa sdeb pa'i phyir yin³ no4 ||
2 P, N, G: de'i for de ma
3 C: om.
4 C: ro492
de la rgyu 'gag¹ ma thag pa 'bras bu skye ba'i rkyen du 'gyur ba ni
mtshungs pa de ma thag pa'i rkyen gyi mtshan nyid yin te| 'di la
dpyad par bya'o || myu gu la sogs pa 'bras bur gyur pa’i chos rnams
skyes pa ma yin na | rgyu sa bon [P 33a] la sogs pa'i 'gag pa 'thad par
mi 'gyur ro || gang gi tshe 'di de lta yin pa de'i tshe rgyu 'gag pa med
pa'i phyir myu gu'i mtshungs pa de ma thag pa'i rkyen gang zhig
|
yin par 'gyur ci ste 'bras bu ma skyes par yang² sa bon 'gag par 'dod
na ni de lta na sa bon 'gags na ste med par gyur na | myu gu’i rkyen
[N 31b] yang gang zhig yin la | sa bon 'gag pa'i rkyen yang gang zhig
yin te 'di gnyi ga rgyu med par 'gyur ro zhes 'chad pa ni | 'gags na [C
29a] rkyen yang gang zhig yin zhes bya ba'o || [G 39a] yang gi sgra ni
skye ba med pa la ltos³ pa ste des na myu gu ma skyes par sa bon
'gag par 'dod na yang gnyi ga rgyu med pa can du 'gyur te de'i
phyir de ma thag mi rigs zhes bya ba'o ||
§148. yang na bdag las ma³ yin gzhan las min zhes bya ba la sogs pas
skye ba bkag pa yin la | skye ba bkag pa de la dgongs nas |
TIBETAN EDITION
chos rnams skyes pa ma yin na ||
'gag ba 'thad par mi 'gyur ro ||
de phyir de ma thag mi rigs ||
zhes gsungs so ||
¹P, N, G: 'gags
2 P, N, G: om.
3 P, N, G: bltos
4 D, C: om. ba
5
C: om.
6 G: de'igzhan yang
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
'gags na rkyen yang gang zhig yin ||
te | 'di la bshad pa ni snga ma nyid sbyar bar bya'o ||
§149. da ni bdag po'i rkyen bsal bar bzhed nas bshad pa sa bon la
sogs pa
dngos po rang bzhin med rnams kyi ||
yod pa gang phyir yod min [D 296] na ||
'di yod pas na 'di 'byung zhes ||
bya ba 'di ni 'thad ma yin|| [MMK I.10] [PSP, 87]
493
'dir gang zhig yod pas gang 'byung ba de ni de'i bdag po yin no zhes
bya ba ni bdag po'i rkyen gyi mtshan nyid yin na dngos po rnams ni
rten cing 'brel¹ par 'byung ba'i phyir | rang bzhin med pa na gang
zhig 'di zhes rgyu nyid du bsnyad pa de ga la yod cing gang yang 'di
1
zhes 'bras bu de nyid du ston pa de ga la yod | de'i phyir mtshan nyid
las kyang rkyen grub pa yod pa ma yin no ||
§150. 'dir² smras ba | snal ma [P 33b] la sogs pa dag las snam bu la sogs
pa skye bar dmigs nas | snal ma la³ sogs pa dag snam bu la sogs pa’i
rkyen yin no ||
¹ P: 'thel
2P, N, G: 'di
³ D, C: om. la
§151. bshad ba bya ste snam bu la sogs pa 'bras bu 'byung ba nyid
yod pa ma yin na¹ | rkyen rnams kyi [G 39b] rkyen² nyid Ita 'grub par494
TIBETAN EDITION
ga la 'gyur | ji ltar snam bu la sogs pa 'bras bu 'byung ba med pa de
Itar bstan ba'i phyir
rkyen rnams so so 'dus pa la³ ||
'bras bu de ni med pa nyid ||
rkyen rnams la ni gang med pa ||
de ni rkyen las ji ltar skye|| [MMK I.11]
zhes gsungs so ||
de la snal ma dang tshig pa dang thag zangs dang [N 32a] son shing la
sogs pa so so ba dag la snam bu so sor yod pa ni ma yin te | de dag la
ma dmigs pa'i phyir dang | rgyu mang post [℃ 296] 'bras bu mang por
thal bar 'gyur ba'i phyir ro || snal ma la sogs pa 'dus pa³ dag la yang
snam bu yod pa ma yin te | yan lag re re ba dag la med pa’i phyir
dang | 'bras bu gcig dum bur7 skye bar thal bar³ 'gyur ba’i phyir ro ||
de'i phyir 'bras bu med pas rkyen dag med do ||
§152. ci ste 'bras bu de med kyangº ||
10
rkyen de dag las skye 'gyur na¹⁰ || [MMK I.12ab] [PsP₁ 88]
1 G: ne
2 P: rkyon
³ D, C: las
3
4 P, N, G: pas
5 G: om. 'dus pa
6P, N, G: om. gcig
7D, C: bu
8P, N, G: om. thal bar
9
'D, C: ci ste de ni med par yang for ci ste 'bras bu de med kyang
10 P, N, G: add the two quarters rkyen min las kyang 'bras bu ni || ci yi phyir na skye
mi 'gyur ||PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
zhes bya bar bsams bar gyur na ni
rkyen ma yin pa dag las kyang ||
ci yi phyir na skye mi 'gyur ||¹ [MMK I.12cd]
rkyen ma yin pa dag la yang 'bras bu yod pa ma yin pas rkyen ma yin
pa² ’jag ma dag las kyang snam bu ci'i phyir na skye bar mi 'gyur |
de'i phyir 'bras bu 'byung ba med do ||
495
§153. 'dir smras pagal te 'bras bu gzhan zhig yin zhing rkyen yang
gzhan yin par 'gyur na ni de'i tshe ci rkyen dag la 'bras bu yod dam
med ces bya bar bsams par gyur na | 'bras bu tha dad pa ni med do ||
'o na ci zhe na | rkyen gyi rang bzhin kho na yin no ||
§154. bshad par bya ste
'bras bu rkyen gyi [D 30a] rang bzhin na³ ||
rkyen rnams bdag gi rang bzhin min || [P
bdag dngos min las [G 40a] 'bras bu gang
de ni ji¹ ltar rkyen rang bzhin || [MMK I.13]
gal te 'bras bu rkyen gyi rang bzhin rkyen gyi rnam par 'gyur ba yin
no zhes rnam par 'jog na ni | de mi rigs te gang gi phyir rkyen des
rnams kyang bdag gi rang bzhin ma yin te | rkyen ma yin pa'i ngo bo
om.
¹ Em: rkyen ma yin pa dag las kyang || ci yi phyir na skye mi 'gyur || (cf. MMKT
I.12). P, N, G, D, C: om.
2 P, N, G: pas
³ D, C: ni
4
Em.: ji. P, N, G, D, C: te. (cf. MMK, I.13)
5 D, C: on496
zhes bya ba'i don to || snam bu¹ ni snal ma’i rang bzhin can no zhes
bya bar brjod na ni gal te [PSP, 89] snal ma dag rang gi ngo bor grub
par gyur na | snam² bur 'gyur na | de dag ni cha shas kyi rang bzhin
cha shas³ rnam par 'gyur ba yin gyi | rang bzhin gyis grub pa ni yod
pa ma yin no || de'i phyirª bdag nyid kyi rang bzhin ma yin pa de dag
las snam bu zhes bya ba'i 'bras bu gang yin pa de jiº ltar snal ma’i
rang bzhin du 'gyur
ji skad du
TIBETAN EDITION
snam bu rgyu las 'grub 'gyur zhing ||
rgyu yang gzhan las 'grub 'gyur bas
gang zhig rang gi 'grub [N 32b] med pa
||
des gzhan ba skyed par ji ltar 'gyur ||
zhes bshad do ||
de phyir rkyen gyi rang bzhin min || [MMK I.14a]
de'i phyir rkyen gyi rang bzhin gyi 'bras bu ni yod pa ma7 yin no ||
§155. 'o na rkyen ma yin pa'i rang bzhin du 'gyur ro³ zhe na
¹P, N, G: add following la snam bu
2 C: snag
3
³ D, C: gyi for cha shas
4 P: om. phyir
5
Em.: las. P, N, G, D, C: la
6D, C: om.
7P, N, G: om.
8P, N, G: om.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
rkyen min rang bzhin [C 30a] 'bras bu ni ||
yod min
[MMK I.14bc₁]
|
te gang gi tshe snam bu snal ma’i rang bzhin du yang med pa de'i
tshe ’gal ba 'jag ma’i rang bzhin du ji ltar 'gyur |
1
§156. 'dir smras pa 'bras bu med du zad mod | rkyen dang rkyen ma
yin pa'i nges pa ni yod pa yin te | de ltar yang khyod kyis gal te 'bras
bu med pa¹ rkyen dag las skye na | rkyen ma yin pa dag las kyang ci'i
phyir skye ba ma yin zhes smras la| snam bu dang re lde zhes bya
ba'i 'bras bu [G 40b] med na ni snal ma dang 'jag ma dag rkyen dang
rkyen ma yin pa nyid du yang mi rigs te | des na 'bras bu yang yod
pa² yin no || [P 34b]
497
§157. bshad par bya ste | gal te 'bras bu yod par gyur na ni | rkyen
dang rkyen ma yin pa dag tu 'gyur ro|| 'di ltar 'bras bu yod na ni 'di
dag ni 'di'i rkyen yin no || 'di dag ni rkyen³ ma yin no zhes bya bar
'gyur na de yang rnam par dpyad pa na med pa nyid de | de’i phyir
'bras bu med pas na ||
rkyen min rkyen du ga la 'gyur || [MMK I.14 c₂d] [PSP₁ 90]
¹ D: adds following yang
1
terkyen dang rkyen [D 30b] ma yin par zhes tshig bsdu'o de'i phyir
dngos po rnams skye ba yod pa ma yin no ||
§158. ji skad du 'phags pa dkon mchog 'byung gnas kyi mdo las
2 P, N, G: add following ma
³ D, C: 'di'i rkyen498
gang na ang stong pa rig pa med pa ni¹ ||
nam mkha’ bar snang bya yi² rjes dang mtshungs ||
gang na’ang ngo bo nyid 'ga' yod min pa ||
de ni nam yang gzhan gyi rgyur mi 'gyur ||
TIBETAN EDITION
gang gi ngo bo nyid ni mi rnyeď³ pa ||
rang bzhin med de ji ltar gzhan gyi rkyen ||
rang bzhin med pa gzhan gyis¹ ci zhig bskyed ||
rgyu de bde bar gshegs pas bstan pa'o ||
thams cad chos kyang mi g-yo brtan par gnas
mi 'gyur 'tshe ba med cing zhi ba ste ||
bzhin ||
ji ltar nam mkha' shes pa med pa
de la mi shes 'gro ba rmongs par 'gyur ||
ji ltar ri bo dag ni mi sgul ba ||
de bzhin chos rnams rtag tu³ bkyod mi nus ||
'chi 'pho med cing skye ba med pa yi ||
chos rnams de ltar rgyal bas rab tu bstan || [PsP₁ 91]
zhes [N 33a] bya ba la sogs pa dang |
de bzhin du
chos gang skye ba med cing 'byung ba med ||
¹ D, C: na
2 P, N, C: bya'i
3
³ N: rnyad
4 P, N, G: gyi
5
C: du bazhes³
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
'chi 'pho med cing rga bar mi 'gyur ba ||
mi yi [G 41a] seng ge yis ni der ston zhing¹ || [℃ 30b]
sems can brgya phrag dag ni de la bkod ||
||
gang la ngo bo nyid ni gang yang med |
gzhan yang ma yin sus kyang ma² rnyed pa ||
nang na ma yin phyi rol dag na yang ||
mi rnyed de dag la ni mgon pos bkod ||
bde bar gshegs pas zhi ba'i 'gro gsungs kyang ||
'gro ba gang yang rnyed par mi 'gyur te ||
de dag 'gro las grol bar [P 35a] rnam par gsungs ||
grol nas sems can mang po grol bar mdzad ||
gsungs pa lta bu'o ||
§159. slob dpon zla ba grags pa'i zhal snga nas sbyar ba'i tshig gsal ba
las | rkyen brtag pa zhes bya ba rab tu byed pa dang po'i 'grel pa'o ||
¹ C: cing
2 D, C: mi
3 D, C: ces
499Abbreviations and Bibliography
Abbreviations: Journals, Dictionaries, Misc.
AASP
ABORI
Apte
ARIRIAB
AS/ÉA
ATBS
BHSD
BHSG
CPD
IASWR
IIJ
JA
Jäschke
JBORS
JIABS
JIBS
Austrian Academy of Sciences Press
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute
The Practical Sanskrit English Dictionary. See Apte
1985.
Annual Report of the International Research Institute for
Advanced Buddhology at Soka University
Asiatische Studien / Études Asiatiques
Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien
Universität Wien
Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary. Vol.
II: Dictionary. See Edgerton 1993.
Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary. Vol.
I: Grammar. See Edgerton 1993.
A Critical Pali Dictionary. See Trenckner et al. 1924-
2011.
Institute for the Advanced Study of World Religions
Indo-Iranian Journal
Journal Asiatique
A Tibetan-English Dictionary. See Jäschke 2003.
Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist
Studies
Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies502
JIP
LC
LVP
MW
Negi
NGMCP
NGMPP
PEW
PTS
PTSD
PW
RKTS
Skt
StII
SUNY
TCD
Tib
Traité
WZKS
WZKSO
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Journal of Indian Philosophy
Tibetan-Sanskrit Dictionary. See Chandra 1990.
de La Vallée Poussin
A Sanskrit English Dictionary. See Monier-Williams
1990.
Tibetan-Sanskrit Dictionary. See Negi 1998.
Nepalese German Manuscript Cataloguing Project
Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project
Philosophy East and West
Pali Text Society
The Pāli Text Society's Pali-English Dictionary. See
Rhys Davids and Stede 1993.
Sanskrit-Wörterbuch. See Böhtlingk and Roth 1990.
Resources for Kanjur & Tanjur Studies. Dept. of South
Asian, Tibetan and Buddhist Studies, University of
Vienna. http://www.istb.univie.ac.at/kanjur/xml3/xml/
(accessed Dec. 27, 2013)
Sanskrit
Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik
State University of New York Press
Bod rgya tshig mdzod chen mo. Beijing: Mi rigs dpe
skrun khang, 1985.
Tibetan
See Lamotte 1966, 1970, 1976, 1980.
Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens
Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Süd- und OstasiensAbbreviations: Primary Sources and Translations
ABh
ABhed
ABhtr
AK/ AKBh
AKBhed
AKBhEj
AKBhtr
AKVy
AN
AS
ASBh
Asta
BCAP
BoBhū
BP
BPed / BP tr
C
CL
CŚ / CŚT
CSTed
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Akutobhayā
Akutobhayā edition. See Huntington 1986.
Akutobhayā translation. See Walleser 1911.
Abhidharmakośa / Abhidharmakośabhāṣya
1989.
Abhidharmakośabhāṣya edition. See Pradhan 1975.
Abhidharmakośabhāṣya Chapter I edition. See Ejima
Abhidharmakośabhāṣya translation. See La Vallée
Poussin 1923-1931.
Abhidharmakośavyakhyā. See Wogihara 1971.
Anguttaranikāya. See Morris and Hardy 1885-1900.
Abhidharmasamuccaya
503
1912.
Abhidharmasamuccayabhāṣya. See Tatia 1976.
Aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā. See Vaidya 1960a.
Bodhicaryāvatārapañjikā. See La Vallée Poussin 1901-
Bodhisattvabhūmi. See Wogihara 1971.
Buddhapalita Madhyamakavṛtti.
Buddhapālita Madhyamakavṛtti edition / Buddhapālita
Madhyamakavṛtti translation. See Saito 1984.
Co ne bstan 'gyur. Microfiches. Stony Brook, New
York: The Institute of the Advanced Study of World
Religions.
Chung lun
Catuhśataka / Catuhśatakatīkā
Catuḥśatakatīkā edition. See Suzuki 1996.504
CŚTTed/CST Catuḥśatakaṭīkā chapters 12 & 13 edition / Catuḥśataka-
tīkā chapters 12 & 13 translation. See Tillemans 1990.
D
DN
DN-attha
DS
G
Gondhla
Iti
Kāś
KP/KPed
*LT
MA / MABh
MABhed
MABhtr
MABHUN
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
MAV
MAVBh
MAVT
sDe dge bKa' 'gyur and bsTan 'gyur. (bsTan 'gyur:) Ed.
J. Takasaki, Z. Yamaguchi, N. Hakamaya. sDe dge
Tibetan Tripitaka bsTan 'gyur
Preserved at the
Faculty of Letters, University of Tokyo. Tokyo: Sekai
seiten kankō kyōkai, 1980. (bKa' 'gyur:) Ed. A.W.
Barber et al. The Tibetan Tripitaka. Taipei edition.
Taipei: SMC Publishing Inc., 1991.
Dīghanikāya. See Rhys Davids and Carpenter 1890-
1911.
Dīghanikāya-aṭṭhakathā. See Rhys Davids, Carpenter
and Stede 1886-1932.
Dhammasangaṇī. See Müller 1885.
Golden Manuscript bsTan 'gyur
Gondhla Manuscript bsTan 'gyur. RKTS.
Itivuttaka. See Windisch 1975.
Kāśikā. See Sharma et al. 1969.
Kāśyapaparivartasūtra / Kāśyapaparivartasūtra edition.
See von Staël-Holstein 1977.
*Lakṣaṇatīkā
Madhayamakāvatāra / Madhyamakāvatārabhāṣya
Madhyamakāvatārabhāṣya edition. See La Vallée Pous-
sin 1907-1912.
Madhyamakāvatārabhāṣya translation. See La Vallée
Poussin 1907, 1910, 1911.
Madhyamakāvatārabhāṣya edition. See Uryuzu and
Nakazawa 2012.
Madhyāntavibhāga
Madhyāntavibhāgabhāṣya. See Nagao 1964.
Madhyāntavibhāgabhāṣyaṭīkā. See Yamaguchi 1934.MHK
MMK
MMKT
MN
MN₁r
MN-attha
MS
N
NBh
NM
NS
NV
P
Pā
Phug brag
PP / PPT
PPed / PP tr
PS/PSV
PSP
PSP₁
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
505
Madhyamakahṛdayakārikā
Mūlamadhyamakakārikā
Mūlamadhyamakakārikā Tibetan translation
Majjhimanikāya. See Trenckner and Chalmers 1888-
1889.
Majjhimanikāya translation. See Ñanamoli and Bodhi
1995.
Majjhimanikāya-atthakathā. See Horner 1933-1938.
Mīmāmsāsūtra
sNar thang bsTan'gyur (manuscript copy, London)
Nyāyabhāṣya. See Thakur 1997a.
Nyāyamukha
Nyāyasūtra. See NBh and NV.
Nyāyavārttika. See Thakur 1997b.
Peking bKa’ 'gyur and bsTan 'gyur. Ed. D. T. Suzuki.
The Tibetan Tripitaka, Peking Edition, Reprinted under
the Supervision of the Otani University, Kyoto.
Tokyo/Kyoto: Tibetan Tripitaka Research Institute,
1957.
Pāṇini's Astādhyāyī. See Böthlingk 2001 and Vasu
1980.
Phug brag Manuscript bsTan 'gyur (2 versions). RKTS.
Prajñāpradīpa / Prajñāpradīpatīkā
Prajñāpradīpa edition of chapters 3-5, 17, 23 and 26/
Prajñāpradīpa translation of chapters 3-5, 17, 23 and
26. See Ames 1986.
Pramāṇasamuccaya / Pramāṇasamuccayavṛtti
Prasannapadā
Prasannapadā edition. See La Vallée Poussin 1970.506
PSPM
PSP
PST
PSV Kit
PSV K
PSV v
PVBh
PVSV
RĀ
RCP
RK
Śastri
SiKau
Siddhi
Śis
SN
SN Nal
SN₁
SN-attha
Sn
SR
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
In Clear Words Sanskrit edition. Ed. A. MacDonald
(infra).
Pañcaskandhaprakaraṇa
Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā
See Kitagawa 1965.
Pramāṇasamuccayavṛtti as translated by Kanakavarman
(Peking ed.)
Pramāṇasamuccayavṛtti as translated by Vasudharara-
kṣita (Peking ed.)
Pramāṇavārttikabhāṣya. See Sānkṛtyāyana 1953.
Pramāņavārttikasvavṛtti. See Gnoli 1960.
Ratnāvalī. See Hahn 1982.
Ratnacūḍaparipṛcchā
Ratnākārasūtra
See Sastri 1987.
Siddhanta Kaumudī Tattvabodhinītīkāsahitā. Laukika-
bhāge-Jñānendrasarasvatīviracitatattvabodhinīsamā-
khyayā, vaidikabhāge-pam. Jayakṛṣṇaviracitasubodhi-
nīsamākhyayā, lingānuśāsane–Bhairavamiśranirmita-
candrakalākhyayā ca vyākhyayā. Mumbayyām: Śrī-
venkateśvara Sṭīm-Mudraṇālaye, 1959.
Vijñaptimātratāsiddhi. See La Vallée Poussin 1929.
Śikṣāsamuccaya. See Bendall 1902.
Samyuttanikāya. See Feer 1884-1898.
Samyuttanikāya Nalandā edition. See Kashyap 1959.
Samyuttanikāya translation. See Bodhi 2000.
Samyuttanikāya-aṭṭhakathā. See Woodward 1937.
Suttanipāta. See Anderson and Smith 1984.
Samadhirājasūtra. See Vaidya 1961.ŚS / ŚSV
ŚSV ed/ŚSVtr
ŚV
TJ
TKK
TSP
sTog
VD
Vin
VM
VM
VMD
VV
VV ed
YD
YS / YSV
YSVed/YSV
tr
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Śūnyatāsaptati / Śūnyatāsaptativrtti
Śūnyatāsaptativṛtti edition (to kārikā 14) / Śūnyatāsapta-
tivṛtti translation. See Erb 1997.
Ślokavārttika. See Śāstrī 1978.
507
Tarkajvālā
Tibetan edition of PSP₁ 55.11-75.12. See TKK 2001.
Tattvasangrahapañjikā. See Śāstrī 1981.
sTog Manuscript bsTan 'gyur. RKTS.
Kāśyapaparivartasūtra ms transcription. See Vorobyova-
Desyatovskaya 2002.
Vinayapitaka. See Oldenberg 1879-1883.
Visuddhimagga. In Visuddi-Magga of Buddhaghosa. Ed.
C.A.F. Rhys Davis. Reprint PTS, 1975.
Visuddhimagga translation. See Nyanatiloka 1975.
Vajramaṇḍadhāraṇī
Vigrahavyāvartanī
Vigrahavyāvartanī edition. See Bhattacharya et al. 1986.
Yuktidīpikā edition. See Wezler and Moteji 1998.
Yuktiṣaṣṭikā / Yuktiṣaṣṭikāvṛtti
Yuktiṣastikāvṛtti edition / Yuktişastikāvṛtti translation.
See Scherrer-Schaub 1991.508
Bibliography
Abhyankar and Shukla 1977 - K.V. Abhyankar and J.M. Shukla, A
Dictionary of Sanskrit Grammar. Baroda: Oriental Institute,
1977.
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Allinger 2012 Eva Allinger, "The Epsilon 1 Manuscript in the
Wellcome Library, London." WZKS 54 (2012) 151-184.
Ames 1982 William L. Ames, Bondage and Liberation According to
the Mādhyamika School of Buddhism: A Study and Translation
of Chapter Sixteen of the Mulamadhyamakakārikās and Five of
Its Commentaries. Unpublished M.A. thesis, University of
Washington, 1982.
Ames 1986 Id., Bhavaviveka's Prajñāpradīpa: Six Chapters. Unpub-
lished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Washington, 1986.
Ames 1993 Id., "Bhāvaviveka's Prajñāpradīpa. A Translation of
Chapter One: 'Examination of Causal Conditions' (Pratyaya)."
JIP 21 (1993) 209-259.
Ames 1994 Id., "Bhāvaviveka's Prajñāpradīpa. A Translation of
Chapter One: 'Examination of Causal Conditions' (Pratyaya)"
Part Two. JIP 22 (1994) 93-135.
Ames 1995
Id., "Bhāvaviveka's Prajñāpradīpa. A Translation of
Chapter Two: 'Examination of the Traversed, the Untraversed,
and That Which is Being Traversed." JIP 23 (1995) 295-365.
Ames 1999
Id., "Bhāvaviveka's Prajñāpradīpa: A Translation of
Chapters Three, Four, and Five, Examining the Ayatanas,
Aggregates, and Elements [from the Tibetan]." Buddhist Litera-
ture 1 (1999) 1-119.
Anderson and Smith 1984 D. Anderson and H. Smith, ed., Sutta-
nipāta. London: PTS, 1913. Reprint 1984.
Apte 1985 V.S. Apte, The Practical Sanskrit English Dictionary.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1965. Reprint 1985.
Arnold 2003
Dan Arnold, "Candrakīrti on Dignāga on Svalakṣaṇas."
JIABS 26 (2003) 139-174.509
Arnold 2005a- Id., Buddhists, Brahmins and Belief: Epistemology in
South Asian Philosophy of Religion. New York: Columbia
University Press, 2005.
Arnold 2005b
Id., "Materials for a Madhyamika Critique of
Foundationalism: An Annotated Translation of Prasannapadā
55.11 to 75.13." JIABS 28 (2005) 411-467.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Arnold 2010
Id., "Self-Awareness (svasamvitti) and Related
Doctrines of Buddhists Following Dignāga: Philosophical Char-
acterizations of Some of the Main Issues." JIP 38 (2010) 323-
378.
Aufrecht 1962 Theodor Aufrecht, Catalogus Catalogorum: An
Alphabetical Register of Sanskrit Works and Authors. Stuttgart:
Franz Steiner Verlag, 1962.
Bajracharya 1995 - Bidya Bhushan Bajracharya, "A Brief Biography
of Pandit Vaidya Asha Kaji Bajracharya.” In Report on Newar
Buddhist Culture Preservation Seminar. Ed. Dr. Bajra Raj
Shakya. Pathan: The Lotus Research Centre and the Nepal
Buddhist Sanskrit Study Centre, 1995. 12-15.
Bareau 1955
André Bareau, Les sectes bouddhiques du Petit
Véhicule. Saigon: École Française d'Extrême-Orient, 1955.
Basham 1988 A.L. Basham, The Wonder that was India. London:
Sidgwick and Jackson, 1988.
Bendall 1902
Cecil Bendall, Śikṣāsamuccaya. St. Petersburg:
Imperial Academy of Sciences, 1902.
Bendall 1992 — Id., Catalogue of the Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscripts in
the University Library, Cambridge. Cambridge, 1883. Reprint,
ed. A. Wezler, Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1992.
Bendall and Rouse 1990 Cecil Bendall and W.D.H. Rouse, Śikṣā
Samuccaya. London, 1932. Reprint Delhi: Motilal Barnasidass,
1990.
-
Bernhard 1965 - Franz Bernhard, ed., Udänavarga. Band 1. Göttingen:
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1965.
Bhatt 1989 - G. P. Bhatt, The Basic Ways of Knowing. Varanasi 1962.
Rev. ed. Delhi: Motilal Barnasidass, 1989.510
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bhattacharya 1974 - K. Bhattacharya, "A Note on the interpretation of
the term sādhyasama in Madhyamaka Texts." JIP 2 (1974) 225-
230.
Bhattacharya 1977 - Id., "On the Relationship between the Vigraha-
vyāvartanī and the Nyāyasūtra-s." Journal of Indo-European
Studies 5 (1977) 265-273.
Bhattacharya 1978 — Id., “Some Notes on the Vigrahavyāvartanī.” JIP
5 (1978) 237-241.
Bhattacharya 1981 Id., "The Grammatical Basis of Nagarjuna's
Arguments: Some Further Considerations." Indologica Taurin-
ensia 9 (1981) 35-43.
Bhattacharya 2012 Ramakrishna Bhattacharya, "Svabhāvavāda and
the Cārvāka/Lokāyata: A Historical Overview." In JIP 40
(2012) 593-614.
Bhattacharya and Tucci 1932 - Ed. V. Bhattacharya and G. Tucci, Ma-
dhyāntavibhāgasūtrabhāṣyaṭīkā. London: Luzac & Co., 1932.
Bhattacharya et al. 1986 — K. Bhattacharya, E.H. Johnston, and A.
Kunst, The Dialectical Method of Nagarjuna: Vigrahavyā-
vartanī. 2nd ed. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1986.
Bocking 1995 - Brian Bocking, Nāgārjuna in China: A Translation of
the Middle Treatise. Lewiston/Queenston/Lampeter: Edwin
Mellen Press, 1995.
Bodhi 2000
Bhikkhu Bodhi, The Connected Discourses of the
Buddha. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2000.
Böthlingk 2001 Otto Böthlingk, Pāṇini's Grammatik. Leipzig, 1887.
Reprint Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2001.
Böthlingk and Roth 1990 — Otto Böhtlingk and Rudolph Roth, San-
skrit-Wörterbuch. 7 vols. St. Petersburg: Kaiserlichen Akademie
der Wissenschaften, 1855-1875. Reprint New Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1990.
Braarvig 1993 Jens Braarvig, Akṣayamatinirdeśasutra. Oslo: Solum
Forlag, 1993.
Brockington 1998 John Brockington, The Sanskrit Epics. Leiden:
Brill, 1998.511
Michael M. Broido, "A Note on dGos-'Brel." The
Journal of the Tibet Society 3 (1983) 5-19.
Broido 1983
Brough 1996 John Brough, "The Language of the Buddhist Sanskrit
Texts." In Collected Papers. Ed. Minoru Hara and J.C. Wright.
London: University of London Press, 1996. 130-154.
-
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Buffetrille and Lopez 2010 — Katia Buffetrille, Don Lopez, tr., Intro-
duction to the History of Indian Buddhism. Eugène Burnouf.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010.
Bugault 1992 Guy Bugault, "Nāgārjuna: examen critique du nirvāṇa
(nivāṇa-parīkṣa)." AS/ÉA 46 (1992) 83-146.
Bühler 1896 — Georg Bühler, Indische Palaeographie von circa 350 A.
Chr. circa 1300 P. Chr. Mit Siebzehn Tafeln in Mappe.
Strassburg: Karl J. Trübner, 1896.
-
Burnouf 1844
Eugène Burnouf, Introduction à l'histoire du
Buddhisme indien. Paris: Impr. royale, 1844.
Butzenberger 2000 Klaus Butzenberger, "Was sind kāraka-s?
Notizen zu einer Rekonstruktion der kāraka-Theorie." In Vivi-
dharatnakarandaka. Festgabe für Adelheid Mette. Ed. C.
Chojnacki, J.-U. Hartmann, V. Tschannerl. Swisttal-Odendorf:
Indica et Tibetica, 2000. 117-138.
Cabezón 1992 José Cabezón, A Dose of Emptiness. New York:
SUNY, 1992.
Cardona 1974 — G. Cardona, “Pāṇini's Kārakas: Agency, Animation
and Identity." JIP 2 (1974) 231-306.
Cardona 1988 - Id., Pāṇini: His Work and its Traditions. Vol. 1. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 1988.
Chakravarti 1975- P. Chakravarti, Origin and Development of the
Samkhya System of Thought. Calcutta 1951. 2nd ed. New Delhi:
Munshiram Manoharlal, 1975.
Chandra 1990 - Lokesh Chandra, Tibetan-Sanskrit Dictionary. Kyoto:
Rinsen Book Co., 1990.
Chang 1983 G.C.C. Chang, ed., A Treasury of Mahāyāna Sūtras.
Selections from the Maharatnakūta Sūtra. University Park:
Pennsylvania State University Press, 1983.512
Chattha Sangayana CD-ROM, Version 3.0. Igatpuri: Vipasanna
Research Institute, 1999.
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Chaudhury 1969 — B.N. Chaudhury, Buddhist Centres in Ancient India.
Calcutta: Sanskrit College, 1969.
Conze 1967 - Edward Conze, Buddhist Thought in India. George Allen
and Unwin, 1962. Reprint Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 1967.
Conze 1968 Id., “The Iconography of the Prajñāpāramitā.” In Thirty
Years of Buddhist Studies: Selected Essays. Ed. E. Conze.
Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1968. 243-268.
Cox 1988 Collett Cox, "On the Possibility of a Nonexistent Object of
Consciousness: Sarvāstivādin and Dārṣṭāntika Theories." JIABS
11 (1988) 31-87.
Cox 1993
Id., "Dependent Origination: Its Elaboration in Early
Sarvāstivādin Abhidharma Texts." In Researches in Indian and
Buddhist Philosophy. Essays in Honour Professor Alex Wayman.
Ed. Ram Karan Sharma. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1993. 119-
141.
Cox 1995
Id., Disputed Dharmas: Early Buddhist Theories on
Existence. Tokyo: International Institute for Buddhist Studies,
1995.
Dayal 1978 Har Dayal, The Bodhisattva Doctrine in Buddhist
Sanskrit Literature. London: Routledge & Keagan Paul Ltd.,
1932. Reprint Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1978.
Deleanu 2000
Florin Deleanu, “A Preliminary Study on Meditation
and the Beginnings of Mahāyāna Buddhism." ARIRIAB 3 (2000)
65-113.
Deleanu 2006 - Id., The Chapter on the Mundane Path (Laukikamārga)
in the Śravakabhumi: A Trilingual Edition (Sanskrit, Tibetan,
Chinese), Annotated Translation, and Introductory Study. Vol. I.
Tokyo: The International Institute for Buddhist Studies, 2006.
Deshpande 1990 Madhav M. Deshpande, "Semantics of Karakas in
Pāṇini: An Exploration of Philosophical and Linguistic Issues."
In Sanskrit and Related Studies: Contemporary Researches andReflections. Ed. B.K. Matilal & Purusottama Bilimoria. Delhi:
Sri Satguru Publications, 1990. 33-57.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Dhammajoti 2009 — K.L. Dhammajoti, Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma. 4th
rev. ed. Hong Kong: Centre of Buddhist Studies, University of
Hong Kong, 2009.
513
Dimitrov 2007 Dragomir Dimitrov, Lehrschrift über die Zwanzig
Präverbien im Sanskrit. Kritische Ausgabe der Vimsatyupa-
sargavṛtti und der tibetischen Übersetzung Ñe bar bsgyur ba ñi
su pa'i 'grel pa. Marburg: Indica et Tibetica, 2007.
Dreyfus and Lindtner 1989 Georges Dreyfus and Christian Lindtner,
"The Yogācāra Philosophy of Dignāga and Dharmakīrti."
Studies in Central and East Asian Religions 2 (1989) 27-52.
Dunne 2004
John D. Dunne, Foundations of Dharmakīrti's Philo-
sophy. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2004.
Eckel 1978
"
Dutt 1947 Nalinaksha Dutt, ed., Gilgit Manuscripts Vol. III, Part 1.
Calcutta: Calcutta Oriental Press, 1947.
Malcolm David Eckel, "Bhāvaviveka and the early
Madhyamika Theories of Language." PEW 28 (1978) 323-337.
Eckel 1980
Id., A Question of Nihilism: Bhāvaviveka's Response to
the Fundamental Problems of Madhyamika Philosophy. Unpub-
lished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, 1980.
Eckel 2008 Id., Bhāviveka and His Buddhist Opponents. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 2008.
Edgerton 1993 Franklin Edgerton, Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit
Grammar and Dictionary. New Haven: Yale University Press,
1953. Reprint New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1993.
Ejima 1980 Y. Ejima, Chūkan-Shiso no Tenkai Bhāvaviveka Kenkyu
(Madhyamakahṛdayakārikā III). Tokyo: Shunjūsha, 1980.
Ejima 1989 Id., Abhidharmakośabhāṣya of Vasubandhu. Chapter
One: Dhātunirdeśa. Tokyo: The Sankibo Press, 1989.
Eltschinger 2007 Vincent Eltschinger, Penser l'autorité des Écri-
tures: La polémique de Dharmakīrti contre la notion brahma-
nique orthodoxe d'un Veda sans auteur. Vienna: AASP, 2007.514
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Eltschinger 2010 Id., "Ignorance, epistemology and soteriology. Part
II." JIABS 33 (2010) 27-74.
Erb 1990
Felix Erb, Die Sunyatāsaptati des Nāgārjuna und die
Śūnyatāsaptativṛtti [Verse 1-32] (unter Berücksichtigung der
Kommentare Candrakīrtis, Parahitas und des Zweiten Dalai
Lama). Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Hamburg,
1990.
Erb 1997 Id., Śūnyatāsaptativṛtti. Candrakīrtis Kommentar zu den
,,Siebzig Versen über die Leerheit" des Nāgārjuna [Kārikās 1-
14]. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1997.
-
Feer 1884-1898 — L. Feer, ed., Samyuttanikaya. London: PTS, 1884-
1898.
Fenner 1983 Peter Fenner, "Candrakīrti's refutation of Buddhist
idealism." PEW 33 (1983) 251-261.
Filliozat 1942 Jean Filliozat, "Catalogue des manuscrits sanskrits et
tibétains de la Société Asiatique." JA, Tome 233, Année 1941-
1942 (1942) 1-81.
Filliozat 1978- Pierre Sylvain Filliozat, Le Mahābhāṣya de Patanjali
avec le Pradīpa de Kaiyata et l'Uddyota de Nageśa: Adhyâya 1
Pāda 1 Ähnika 8-9. Pondichéry: Institut Français d'Indologie,
1978.
Fleet 1904 John Faithfull Fleet, tr., Indian Paleography by Johann
Georg Bühler. Edited as an Appendix to The Indian Antiquary
33 (1904).
Franco 1984 Eli Franco, "Studies in the Tattvopaplavasimha II. The
Theory of Error." JIP 12 (1984) 105-187.
Franco 2001
Id., "Fragments of a Buddhist Pramāṇa-Theory from
the Kuṣāṇa Period." Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai Fellowship News-
letter 4 (2001) 2-12.
Franco 2007- Id., “Prajñākaragupta on pratītyasamutpāda and reverse
causation." In Pramāṇakīrtiḥ. Papers dedicated to Ernst
Steinkellner on the occasion of his 70th birthday. Ed. B. Kellner,
H. Krasser, H. Lasic, M.T. Much, H. Tauscher. Vienna: ATBS,
2007. 163-185.Frauwallner 1956
Philosophie.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Franco 2010 Id., "The Discussion of pramāṇas in the Spitzer
Manuscript." In Logic in Earliest Classical India. Papers of the
12th World Sanskrit Conference held in Helsinki, Finland, 13-18
July 2003, Vol. 10.2. Ed. Brendan S. Gillon. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 2010. 121-138.
Frauwallner 1957
104-146.
515
Erich Frauwallner, Geschichte der indischen
Vol. 2. Salzburg: Otto Müller Verlag, 1956.
Id., "Vasubandhu's Vādavidhi." WZKSO 1 (1957)
Frauwallner 1958 Id., Die Philosophie des Buddhismus. 2. Auflage.
Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1958.
Frauwallner 1959 — Id., “Dignāga, sein Werk und seine Entwicklung."
WZKSO 3 (1959) 83-164.
Frauwallner 1960 Id., "Das Eindringen der Sprachtheorie in die
indischen philosophischen Systeme." In Indologen-Tagung 1959
Verhandlungen der Indologischen Arbeitstagung in Essen-
Bredeney, Villa Hügel, 13.-15. Juli 1959. Ed. Ernst Wald-
schmidt. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1960. 239-243.
Frauwallner 1961 — Id., “Mīmāmsāsūtram I, 1, 6-23.” WZKSO 5 (1961)
113-124.
Frauwallner 1964 — Id., “Abhidharma-Studien." WZKS 8 (1964) 59-99.
Frauwallner 1982 Id., Kleine Schriften. Ed. G. Oberhammer and E.
Steinkellner. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1982.
Frauwallner 1984 Id., History of Indian Philosophy. Transl. V.M.
Bedekar. Salzburg/Delhi 1973. Reprint Delhi: Motilal Barnasi-
dass, 1984.
Frauwallner 1995 Id., Studies in Abhidharma Literature and the
Origins of Buddhist Philosophical Systems. Tr. Sophie Francis
Kidd. Albany: SUNY 1995.
Funayama 1991 - Toru Funayama, "On Aśrayasiddha." JIBS 39 (1991)
28-34.
Galloway 2001 Brian Galloway, "Toward a New Edition and
Translation of Chapter 13 of the Prasannapadā of Candrakīrti."
ZDMG 151 (2001) 321-350.516
Ganeri 1999
Jonardon Ganeri, Semantic Powers: The Meaning and
Means of Knowing in Classical Indian Philosophy, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1999.
Garbe 1925
Richard Garbe, Indische Reiseskizzen. München-
Neubiberg: Oskar Schloss Verlag, 1925.
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Garfield 1995 — Jay Garfield, The Fundamental Wisdom of the Middle
Way. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Garfield 2008
Id., "Turning a Madhyamaka Trick: Reply to
Huntington." JIP 36 (2008) 507-527.
Gerow 2008
Edwin Gerow, "Eu ápxã v ó λóyos.” In
Śāstrārambha. Inquiries into the Preamble in Sanskrit. Ed.
Walter Slaje. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 2008. ix-xv.
Gnoli 1960 R. Gnoli, The Pramāṇavārttikam of Dharmakīrti: The
First Chapter with the Autocommentary. Rome: Istituto Italiano
per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente, 1960.
Gokhale 1937 — V.V. Gokhale, “Pañcaskandhaka by Vasubandhu and
its commentary by Sthiramati." ABORI 13 (1937) 276-286.
Gokhale 1947 Id., "Fragments from the Abhidharmasamuccaya of
Asamga." Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society: Bombay Branch
23 (1947) 13-38.
Gokhale 1985 Id., "Madhyamakahṛdayakārikā Tarkajvālā Chapter I."
Miscellanea Buddhica. Ed. C. Lindtner. Copenhagen: Akade-
misk Forlag, 1985. 76-107.
Gomez 1976 Luis Gomez, "Proto-Madhyamika in the Pali Canon."
PEW 26 (1976) 137-165.
Gordon 1959 Antoinette K. Gordon, The Iconography of Tibetan
Lamaism. Rev. ed. Tokyo: Charles E. Tuttle Co., 1959.
-
Greetham 1992 D. C. Greetham, Textual Scholarship: An Intro-
duction. New York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1992.
Griffiths 1991 Paul Griffiths, On Being Mindless: Buddhist
Meditation and the Mind-Body Problem. La Salle, Illinois: Open
Court Publishing Company, 1991.Grönbold 1991
Günter Grönbold, ed., Tibetische Buchdeckel:
Ausstellung 8. April bis 1. Juni 1991. München: Bayerische
Staatsbibliothek, 1991.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Grünendahl 1989 R. Grünendahl, A Concordance of H.P. Sastri's
Catalogue of the Durbar Library and the Microfilms of the
Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project. [Followed by:]
H.P. Śāstri, A Catalogue of Palm-leaf and Selected Paper Mss.
belonging to the Durbar Library Nepal, Vol. 1 and 2. Stuttgart:
Franz-Steiner Verlag, 1989.
517
—
Gyatso 1992 Janet Gyatso, ed., In the Mirror of Memory. Albany:
SUNY, 1992.
Hahn 1982 Michael Hahn, Nāgārjuna's Ratnāvalī. Bonn: Indica et
Tibetica Verlag, 1982.
Halbfass 1992
1992.
Hahn 1994 Id., "On Some Rare Particles, Words and Auxiliaries in
Classical Tibetan." In Tibetan Studies, Proceedings of the 6th
Seminar of the International Association for Tibetan Studies,
Fagernes 1992, Vol. 1. Ed. Per Kvaerne. Oslo: The Institute for
Comparative Research in Human Culture, 1994. 288-294.
Halbfass 1988- Wilhelm Halbfass, India and Europe. Albany: SUNY,
1988.
Hartmann 1987
Id., On Being and What There Is. Albany: SUNY,
Harrison 1990 Paul Harrison, The Samadhi of Direct Encounter with
the Buddhas of the Present. Tokyo: The International Institute
for Buddhist Studies, 1990.
Hartmann 1985 Jens-Uwe Hartmann, “Dhāraṇī and Pratibhāna:
Memory and Eloquence of the Bodhisattvas." JIABS 8 (1985)
17-29.
Id., Das Varṇārhavarṇastotra des Matrceta.
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1987.
Hattori 1968 Masaaki Hattori, Dignāga, On Perception, being the
Pratyakṣapariccheda of Dignaga's Pramāṇasamuccaya, from
the Sanskrit fragments and the Tibetan versions. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1968.518
Hattori 1979 Id., "Apoha and Pratibhā." In Sanskrit and Indian
Studies. Ed. M. Nagatomi, B.K. Matilal, J.M. Masson and E.
Dimock. Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing, 1979. 61-73.
Hattori 2000
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Id., “Dignāga’s Theory of Meaning." In Wisdom,
Compassion and the Search for Understanding. Ed. Jonathan
Silk. Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press, 2000. 137-146.
Hayes 1988 Richard Hayes, Dignāga on the Interpretation of Signs.
Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1988.
Hayes 1994 - Id., "Nāgārjuna's Appeal." JIP 22 (1994) 299-378.
Heitmann 2004
Annette Heitmann, Nektar der Erkenntnis.
Buddhistische Philosophie des 6. Jh.: Bhavyas Tarkajvālā I-
III.26. Aachen: Shaker Verlag, 2004.
Heitmann 2009 Id., Textedition und -kritik von Bhavyas Madhya-
makahṛdayakārikā I-III. Hamburg: Verlag Dr. Kovač, 2009.
von
von Hinüber 1991 - Oskar von Hinüber, The Oldest Pāli Manuscript:
Four Folios of the Vinaya-Piṭaka from the National Archives,
Kathmandu. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1991.
-
Hinüber 2000
Id., "Der vernachlässigte Wortlaut. Die
Problematik der Herausgabe buddhistischer Sanskrit-Texte." In
Zur Überlieferung, Kritik und Edition alter und neuerer Texte.
Ed. K. Gärtner and H.H. Krummacher. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner
Verlag, 2000. 17-36.
von Hinüber 2001 Id., Das ältere Mittelindisch im Überblick. Vienna:
AASP, 2001.
Hirakawa 1990 — Akira Hirakawa, A History of Indian Buddhism. Ed.
and tr. Paul Groner. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press,
1990.
Hodgson 1828 - Brian H. Hodgson, "Notices of the Language, Lit-
erature, and Religion of the Bauddhas of Nepal and Bhot."
Asiatic Researches 16 (1828) 409-449.
Hodgson 1874 - Id., Essays on the Languages, Literature and Religion
of Nepal and Tibet: Together with Further Papers on the
Geography, Ethnology and Commerce of Those Countries.
Reprinted, with Corrections and Additions, from "Illustrationsof the Literature and Religion of the Buddhists," Serampore,
1841; and "Selections from the Records of the Government of
Bengal, No. XXVII.," Calcutta, 1857. London: Trübner & Co.,
1874.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Hoornaert 1999 Paul Hoornaert, "An Annotated Translation of
Madhyamakahṛdayakārikā/Tarkajvālā V.1-7." Studies and
Essays, Behavioral Sciences and Philosophy 19 (1999) 127-159.
Jeffrey Hopkins, Compassion in Tibetan Buddhism.
London: Rider & Co., 1980.
Hopkins 1980
519
Hopkins 1983 Id., Meditation on Emptiness. London: Wisdom Publi-
cations, 1983.
Hopkins 1989
Id., "A Tibetan delineation of different views of
Emptiness in the Indian Middle Way School." The Tibet Journal
14 (1989) 10-43.
Houben 1995
Horner 1933-1938 I.B. Horner, ed., Majjhimanikāya-Aṭṭhakathā (Pa-
pañcasudani). Vol. III-V. London: PTS, 1933-1938.
Jan Houben, The Sambandha-Samuddeśa and
Bhartrhari's Philosophy of Language. Groningen: Egbert
Forsten, 1995.
Hunter 1896
William Wilson Hunter, Life of Brian Houghton
Hodgson. London: J. Murray, 1896.
Huntington 1986-C.W. Huntington, Jr., The "Akutobhayā" and Early
Indian Madhyamaka. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University
of Michigan, 1986.
Huntington 1989 - Id., The Emptiness of Emptiness. Honolulu:
University of Hawaii Press, 1989.
Huntington 2003 Id., "Was Candrakīrti a Prasangika?" In The
Svātantrika-Prasangika Distinction. Ed. G. Dreyfus and S.
McClintock. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2003. 67-91.
Iida 1966 Shotaro Iida, "Agama (Scripture) and Yukti (Reason) in
Bhāvaviveka." In Indogaku Bukkyōgaku Ronshū. Ed. Sakamoto
Yukio. Kyoto: Heirakuji-Shoten, 1966. 79-96.
Iida 1980 Id., Reason and Emptiness: A Study in Logic and
Mysticism. Tokyo: Hokuseido Press, 1980.520
Inada 1970- Kenneth Inada, Nāgārjuna: The Philosophy of the Middle
Way. Albany: SUNY, 1970.
Isaacson 1995
Harunaga Isaacson, Materials for the study of the
Vaiseșika system. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Leiden, 1995.
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Iwata 1993 Takashi Iwata, Prasanga und Prasangaviparyaya bei
Dharmakīrti und seinen Kommentatoren. Vienna: ATBS, 1993.
Janert 1995 - Klaus L. Janert, Bibliographie mit den Berichten über die
Mündliche und Schriftliche Textweitergabe sowie die Schreib-
materialien in Indien (Berichtszeit bis 1955). Bonn: VGH
Wissenschaftsverlag, 1995.
Jäschke 2003 - H.A. Jäschke, A Tibetan-English Dictionary. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1881. Reprint New York: Dover
Publications, 2003.
Jayaswal and Sāńkṛtyāyana 1937- K.P. Jayaswal and R. Sänkṛtyāyana,
"Vigrahavyāvarttanī." JBORS 23 (1937) Appendix.
Jha 1964
G. Jha, Pūrva-Mimāmsā in its Sources. 2nd ed. Varanasi:
Banaras Hindu University Press, 1964.
Johnston 1992
E.H. Johnston, The Buddhacarita or Acts of the
Buddha. Lahore 1936. Rev. ed. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1992.
de Jong 1949 J.W. de Jong, Cinq Chapitres de la Prasannapadā.
Paris: Guethner, 1949.
de Jong 1974 - Id., "A Brief History of Buddhist Studies in Europe and
America." The Eastern Buddhist 7 (1974) no. 1, 55-106; no. 4,
49-82.
de Jong 1977- Id., ed. Mulamadhyamakakārikāḥ. Madras: The Adyar
Library and Research Centre, 1977.
de Jong 1978- Id., "Textcritical Notes on the Prasannapadā." IIJ 20
(1978) 25-59; 217-252.
de Jong 1979 Id., "La Madhyamakaśāstrastuti de Candrakīrti."
Oriens Extremus 9 (1962) 47-56. Reprinted in Buddhist Studies.
Ed. G. Schopen. Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press, 1979. 541-
550.de Jong 1981
Middle
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
521
Id., Review of Mervyn Sprung, Lucid Exposition of the
Way. IIJ 23 (1981) 227-230.
de Jong 1993 Id., Review of Ragunath Pandeya, The Madhyamaka-
śāstram of Nāgārjuna with the commentaries Akutobhayā by
Nāgārjuna, Madhyamakavṛtti by Buddhapalita, Prajñāpradīpa-
vṛtti by Bhavaviveka, Prasannapadavṛtti by Candrakīrti criti-
cally reconstructed. IIJ 36 (1993) 144-146.
Joshi and Roodbergen 1971 S.D. Joshi and J.A.F. Roodbergen,
Patañjali's Vyakaraṇa-Mahābhāṣya: Karmadhārayāhnika (P.
2.1.51-2.1.72). Poona: University of Poona, 1971.
Junankar 1978 N.S. Junankar, Gautama: The Nyāya Philosophy.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1978.
Kajiyama 1963 — Yuichi Kajiyama, "Bhāvaviveka's Prajñāpradīpaḥ (1.
Kapitel)." WZKSO 7 (1963) 37-62.
Kajiyama 1964— Id., "Bhāvaviveka's Prajñāpradīpaḥ (1. Kapitel)."
WZKSO 8 (1964) 100-130.
Kajiyama 1968 Id., "Bhāviveka, Sthiramati and Dharmapāla."
WZKSO 12-13 (1968) 193-203.
-
"
Kajiyama 1973 - Id., "Three Kinds of Affirmation and Two kinds of
Negation in Buddhist Philosophy.” WZKS 17 (1973) 161-175.
Kane 1973
Kajiyama 1991 Id., "On the Authorship of the Upayahṛdaya." In
Studies in the Buddhist Epistemological Tradition. Proceedings
of the Second International Dharmakīrti Conference. Vienna
June 11-16, 1989. Ed. E. Steinkellner. Vienna: AASP, 1991.
107-117.
Kajiyama 1998 Id., An Introduction to Buddhist Philosophy. An
Annotated Translation of the Tarkabhāṣā of Mokṣākaragupta.
Kyoto 1966. Reprint Vienna: ATBS, 1998.
P.V. Kane, History of Dharmaśāstra. Vol. 3. 2nd ed.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1973.
Kartre 1954 - S.M. Kartre, Introduction to Indian Textual Criticism. 2nd
ed. Poona: Deccan College, Post-graduate and Research
Institute, 1954.522
Kashyap 1959 — J. Kashyap, The Samyutta Nikāya. 4. Salāyatanavagga.
Nālandā: Pāli Publication Board, Bihar Govt., 1959.
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Katsura 1975 — Shoryu Katsura, "New Sanskrit Fragments of the Pra-
māṇasamuccaya." JIP 3 (1975) 67-78.
Katsura 1977 - Id., "A Study of the Nyāyamukha I." Hiroshima
Daigaku Bungakubu Kiyō 37 (1977) 106-127.
Katsura 1978- Id., "A Study of the Nyāyamukha II." Hiroshima
Daigaku Bungakubu Kiyō 38 (1978) 110-130.
Katsura 1979a - Id., "A Study of the Nyāyamukha III." Hiroshima
Daigaku Bungakubu Kiyō 39 (1979) 63-83.
Katsura 1979b - Id., "The Apoha Theory of Dignāga." JIBS (1979)
493-489.
Katsura 1982 Id., "A Study of the Nyāyamukha V." Hiroshima
Daigaku Bungakubu Kiyō 42 (1982) 82-100.
Id., “Dharmakīrti's Theory of Truth.” JIP 12 (1984)
Katsura 1984
215-235.
Katsura 1985 Id., “On Trairūpya Formulae." In Buddhism and Its
Relation to Other Religions: Essays in Honour of Dr. Shozen
Kumoi on his Seventieth Birthday. Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten,
1985. 161-172.
Katsura 1992 — Id., “Dignāga and Dharmakīrti on adarśanamātra and
anupalabdhi." AS/ÉA 46 (1992) 222-231.
Katsura 2009 - Id., "Rediscovering Dignāga through Jinendrabuddhi."
In Sanskrit manuscripts in China. Proceedings of a panel at the
2008 Beijing Seminar on Tibetan Studies October 13 to 17. Ed.
E. Steinkellner, Duan Qing, H. Krasser. Beijing: China
Tibetology Publishing House, 2009. 153-166.
Keira 2004 Ryusei Keira, Madhyamika and Epistemology. A Study of
Kamalaśīla's Method for Proving the Voidness of all Dharmas.
Introduction, Annotated Translations and Tibetan Texts of
Selected Sections of the Second Chapter of the Madhyama-
kāloka. Vienna: ATBS, 2004.523
Kellner 2010 — Birgit Kellner, "Self-Awareness (svasamvedana) in
Dignāga's Pramānasamuccaya and -vṛtti: A Close Reading."
JIP 38 (2010) 203-231.
Kimura 1999
Toshihiko Kimura, "A New Chronology of
Dharmakīrti." In Dharmakīrti's Thought and Its Impact on
Indian and Tibetan Philosophy. Proceedings of the Third
International Dharmakīrti Conference, Hiroshima, November 4-
6, 1997. Ed. Shoryu Katsura. Vienna: AASP, 1999. 209-214.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Kishine 2001a - Toshiyuki Kishine, "A Critical Text of Chapter XXIV
Āryasatyaparīkṣā of Prasannapadā (I)." In Fukuokadaigaku
jinbun ronso (Fukuoka University Review of Literature &
Humanities), Vol. 33.2 (2001) 1003-1024.
Kishine 2001b - Id., "A Critical Text of Chapter XXIV,
Āryasatyaparīkṣā of Prasannapadā (II)." In Fukuokadaigaku
jinbun ronso (Fukuoka University Review of Literature &
Humanities) 33.3 (2001) 1761-1782.
Kishine 2002 Id., "A Critical Text of Chapter XXIV, Āryasatya-
parīkṣā of Prasannapadā (III).” In Fukuokadaigaku jinbun ronso
(Fukuoka University Review of Literature & Humanities) 34.1
(2002) 197-232.
Kitigawa 1965 - Hidenori Kitigawa, Indo koten ronrigaku no kenkyū:
Jinna no taikei (Studies in Indian Classical Logic, Dignāga's
System). Tokyo: Suizuki Gakujutsu Zaidan, 1965.
Kobayashi 2010
Hisayasu Kobayashi, "Self-Awareness and Mental
Perception. "JIP 38 (2010): 233-245.
Kobayashi 2013 - Id., "An Eye-disease Called Timira." JIBS 61 (2013)
1078-1084.
Kragh 2003- Ulrich Timme Kragh, Karmaphalasambandha in verses
17.1-20 of Candrakīrti's Prasannapadā. Unpublished Ph.D. dis-
sertation, University of Copenhagen, 2003.
Kragh 2006
Id., Early Buddhist Theories of Action and Result: A
Study of Karmaphalasambandha. Candrakīrti's Prasannapadā,
Verses 17.1-20. Vienna: ATBS, 2006.524
Kragh 2009 Id., "Classicism in Commentarial Writing: Exegetical
Parallels in the Indian Mülamadhyamakakārikā Commentaries."
JIATS 5 (2009) 1-69.
Krasser 2011
Helmut Krasser, "How to Teach a Buddhist Monk to
Refute the Outsiders. Text-critical Remarks on some Works by
Bhāviveka.” Dhi, Journal of Rare Buddhist Texts Research
Department 51 (2011) 49-76.
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Krasser 2012a
Id., "Bhāviveka, Dharmakīrti and Kumārila.” In
Devadattiyam: Johannes Bronkhorst Felicitation Volume. Ed. F.
Voegeli, V. Eltschinger, D. Feller, M. Piera Candotti, B.
Diaconescu & M. Kulkarni. Bern: Peter Lang, 2012. 535-594.
Krasser 2012b
Id., "Logic in a Religious Context: Dharmakīrti in
Defence of agama." In Can the Veda Speak? Dharmakīrti
against Mīmāṁsā exegetics and Vedic authority. An annotated
translation of PVSV 164,24-176,16. Ed. Vincent Eltschinger,
Helmut Krasser, John Taber. Vienna: AASP, 2012. 83-118.
Kritzer 1999 - Robert Kritzer, Rebirth and Causation in the Yogācāra
Abhidharma. Vienna: ATBS, 1999.
van der Kuijp 2006 Leonard van der Kuijp, "The Earliest Indian
Reference to Muslims in a Buddhist Philosophical Text of circa
700." JIP 34 (2006) 169-202.
La Vallée Poussin 1901-1912 Louis de La Vallée Poussin, Bodhi-
cāryāvatārapañjikā: Prajñākaramati's Commentary to the
Bodhicaryāvatāra of Santideva. Calcutta: Asiatic Society of
Bengal, 1901-1912.
La Vallée Poussin 1907 Id., “Madhyamakāvatāra: Introduction au
Traité du Milieu de l'Acārya Candrakīrti, avec le commentaire
de l'auteur, traduit d'après la version tibétaine.” Le Muséon 8
(1907) 249-317.
Id., Madhyamakāvatāra par
Candrakīrti. St. Petersburg: Imperial Academy of Sciences,
1907-1912.
La Vallée Poussin 1907-1912
La Vallée Poussin 1909 - Id., "Bodhisattva (in Sanskrit Literature)." In
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics. Vol. 2. Ed. James
Hastings. Edinburgh: Clark, 1909.739-753.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
525
La Vallée Poussin 1910 Id., “Madhyamakāvatāra: Introduction au
Traité du Milieu de l'Ācārya Candrakīrti, avec le commentaire
de l'auteur, traduit d'après la version tibétaine." Le Muséon 11
(1910) 271-358.
La Vallée Poussin 1911 Id., "Madhyamakāvatāra: Introduction au
Traité du Milieu de l'Ācārya Candrakīrti, avec le commentaire
de l'auteur, traduit d'après la version tibétaine." Le Muséon 12
(1911) 235-328.
La Vallée Poussin 1913a
Goethem, 1913.
Id., Théorie des Douze Causes. Gand: Van
La Vallée Poussin 1913b · Id., "Les Quatre Odes de Nāgārjuna.” Le
Muséon 14 (1913) 1-18.
La Vallée Poussin 1923-1931 — Id., L'Abhidharmakośa de Vasubandhu.
Paris: Geuthner, 1923-1931.
La Vallée Poussin 1929 Id., Vijñaptimātratāsiddhi: La siddhi de
Hiuan-Tsang. Buddhica, Documents et travaux pour l'étude du
bouddhisme publiés sous la direction de Jean Przyluski. Tome I
(1928), Tome II (1929). Paris: Librairie Orientaliste Paul
Geuthner.
La Vallée Poussin 1933 — Id., “Réflexions sur le Madhyamaka." MCB
2 (1933) 1-59.
La Vallée Poussin 1970 Id., Madhyamakavṛttiḥ. Mulamadhyamaka-
kārikās (Madhyamikasūtras) de Nāgārjuna avec la Prasanna-
padā Commentaire de Candrakīrti. St. Petersburg: Imperial
Academy of Sciences, 1903-1913. Reprint Osnabrück: Biblio
Verlag, 1970.
Lamotte 1936 — Étienne Lamotte, "Madhyamakavṛtti: XVII Chapitre.
Examen de l'Acte et du Fruit." MCB 4 (1936) 265-288.
Id., “Mañjuśrī." T'oung Pao 48 (1960) 1-96.
Lamotte 1960
Lamotte 1966 Id., Le Traité de la grande Vertu de Sagesse de
Nāgārjuna (Mahāprajñāpāramitāśāstra). Tome I. Louvain:
Institut Orientaliste, Université de Louvain, 1966.526
Lamotte 1970 Id., Le Traité de la grande Vertu de Sagesse de
Nāgārjuna (Mahāprajñāpāramitāśāstra). Tome III. Louvain:
Institut Orientaliste, Université de Louvain, 1970.
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Lamotte 1976 Id., Le Traité de la grande Vertu de Sagesse de
Nāgārjuna (Mahāprajñāpāramitāśāstra). Tome IV. Louvain:
Institut Orientaliste, Université de Louvain, 1976.
Lamotte 1980 Id., Le Traité de la grande Vertu de Sagesse de
Nāgārjuna (Mahāprajñāpāramitāśāstra). Tome V. Louvain:
Institut Orientaliste, Université de Louvain, 1980.
Lamotte 1987
Id., L'Enseignement de Vimalakīrti (Vimala-
kirtinirdeśa). Louvain, 1962. Reprint Louvain: Institut Orien-
taliste, 1987.
Lamotte 1988 - Id., History of Indian Buddhism. Transl. S. Webb-Boin.
Louvain: Institut Orientaliste, 1988.
Lang 1976 - Karen Lang, Showing the Realization of the Refutation of
Holding Extreme Views: Chapter Fourteen of Candrakīrti's
Bodhisattvayogācāracatuḥśatakaṭīkā. Edited from the Sanskrit
Fragments and the Tibetan Texts. Unpublished M.A. thesis,
University of Washington, 1976.
Lang 1986 Id., Aryadeva's Catuḥśataka: On the Bodhisattva's
Cultivation of Merit and Knowledge. Copenhagen: Akademisk
Forlag, 1986.
Lang 1990 Id., "Spa-tshab Nyi-ma-grags and the Introduction of
Prasangika Madhyamaka into Tibet." In Reflections on Tibetan
Culture. Essays in Memory of Turrell V. Wylie. Ed. L. Epstein
and R.F. Sherbourne. Lewiston, New York: Edwin Mellen
Press, 1990. 127-141.
Lang 2001 Id., "Poetic license in the Buddhist Sanskrit Verses of the
Upāliparipṛccha." IIJ 44 (2001) 231-240.
Lang 2003
Id., Four Illusions, Candrakīrti's Advice to Travelers on
the Bodhisattva Path. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Lariviere 1989 - Richard Lariviere, The Naradasmrti. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania, 1989.527
Larson and Bhattacharya 1987 G.J. Larson R.S. Bhattacharya, ed.
Samkhya: A Dualist Tradition in Indian Philosophy. Published
as Vol. 4 of Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies. New Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 1987.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Lasic 2010 Horst Lasic, "A Hot Dispute About Lukewarm Air:
Dignāga on Aptavāda." In Logic and Belief in Indian Philoso-
phy. Ed. Piotr Balcerowicz. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2010.
521-537.
Lasic et al. 2012 — Horst Lasic, Helmut Krasser, Ernst Steinkellner, ed.,
Jinendrabuddhi's Viśālāmalavatī Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā,
Chapter 2. Beijing-Vienna: China Tibetology Publishing House
& AASP, 2012.
Lefmann 1902. S. Lefmann, ed., Lalita Vistara. Leben und Lehre des
Çâkya-Buddha. Halle: Verlag der Buchhandlung des Waisen-
hauses, 1902.
Li 2012 Xuezhu Li, "Madhyamakāvatāra-kārikā." China Tibetology
18 (2012) 1-16.
-—
Li-S 2012 - Shenghai Li, Candrakīrti's Agama: A Study of the Concept
and Uses of Scripture in Classical Indian Buddhism.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Wisconsin-Madi-
son, 2012.
Li and Steinkellner 2008 Xuezhu Li and Ernst Steinkellner, Vasu-
bandhu's Pañcaskandhaka. Beijing-Vienna: China Tibetology
Publishing House & AASP, 2008.
Lienhard 1988 Siegfried Lienhard, Nepalese Manuscripts, Part 1:
Nevārī and Sanskrit described by Siegfried Lienhard with the
collaboration of Thakur Lal Manandhar. Stuttgart: Franz-
Steiner Verlag, 1988.
Lindtner 1979
Christian Lindtner, "Candrakīrti's Pañcaskandha-
prakaraṇa." Acta Orientalia 40 (1979) 87-145.
Lindtner 1982a Id., "Adversaria Buddhica." WZKS 26 (1982) 167-
194.
Lindtner 1982b — Id., Nagarjuniana. Copenhagen: Akademisk Forlag,
1982.528
Lindtner 1986 - Id., “Bhavya, the Logician." The Adyar Library
Bulletin 50 (1986) 58-84.
Lindtner 1995
Id., "Bhavya's Madhyamakahṛdaya (Pariccheda
Five)." The Adyar Library Bulletin 59 (1995) 37-65.
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Lindtner 2001
Id., Madhyamakahṛdayam of Bhavya. Adyar: The
Adyar Library and Research Centre, 2001.
Loizzo 2007
Nagarjuna's Reason Sixty with Chandrakīrti's Reason
Sixty Commentary. New York: The American Institute of
Buddhist Studies at Columbia University, 2007.
Lugli 2011 Ligeia Lugli, The Conception of Language in Indian
Mahāyāna, with Special Reference to the Lankāvatāra.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of London, 2011.
Luo forthcoming Hong Luo, Ratnākaraśānti’s Prajñāpāramitopa-
desa, China Tibetology Publishing House, forthcoming.
Maas 1958
Paul Maas, Textual Criticism. Tr. Barbara Flower.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1958.
MacDonald 2000 Anne MacDonald, "The Prasannapadā: More
Manuscripts from Nepal." WZKS 44 (2000) 165–181.
MacDonald 2003 Id., "Interpreting Prasannapadā 19.3-7 in Context:
A Response to Claus Oetke." WZKS 47 (2003) 143-195.
MacDonald 2005- Id., "Manuscript Description." In Jinendrabuddhi's
Viśālamalāvatī Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā. Chapter 1. Vol. 2. Ed.
E. Steinkellner, H. Krasser, H. Lasic. Beijing-Vienna: China
Tibetology Publishing House & AASP, 2005. x-xxxvi.
MacDonald 2007 — Id., "Revisiting the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā: Text-
critical Proposals and Problems." Studies in Indian Philosophy
and Buddhism 14 (2007) 25-55.
MacDonald 2008 Id., "Recovering the Prasannapadā." Critical
Review for Buddhist Studies 3 (2008) 9-38.
MacDonald 2009 Id., "Knowing Nothing: Candrakīrti and Yogic
Perception." In Yogic Perception, Meditation and Altered States
of Consciousness. Ed. Eli Franco & Dagmar Eigner. Vienna:
AASP, 2009. 133-169.MacDonald 2011 Id., "Who is that Masked Man? Candrakīrti's Op-
ponent in PsP I 55.11-58.7.” JIP (2011) 677-694.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
MacDonald 2015 — Id., "Pragmatic Translating: The Case of Pa tshab
Nyi ma grags." In Cultural Flows across the Western Himalaya.
Ed. Patrick Mc Allister, Cristina Scherrer-Schaub, Helmut
Krasser. Vienna: AASP, 2015. 249-278.
529
Maithrimurthi 1999 – M. Maithrimurthi, Wohlwollen, Mitleid, Freude
und Gleichmut. Eine ideengeschichtliche Untersuchung der vier
apramāṇas in der buddhistischen Ethik und Spiritualität von den
Anfängen bis hin zum frühen Yogācāra. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner
Verlag, 1999.
Malalasekera 1974 G.P. Malalasekera, Dictionary of Pāli Proper
Names. London: PTS, 1974.
Matilal 1974
Matilal 1970 B.K. Matilal, "Reference and Existence in Nyāya and
Buddhist Logic.” JIP 1 (1970) 83-110.
Id., "A Note on the Nyaya Fallacy Sadhyasama and
Petitio Principii." JIP 2 (1974) 211-224.
Matilal 1985 - Id., Logic, Language and Reality. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1985.
Matilal 1998. Id., The Character of Logic in India. Ed. J. Ganeri and
H. Tiwari. Albany: SUNY, 1998.
—
Matsumoto 2005 Koji Matsumoto, On the Dialogue between
Candrakīrti and Bhāviveka in Prasannapada 1.1 (in Japanese).
Unpublished B.A. thesis, Taishō University, 2005.
Matsunami 1965
Matsumoto 2011 Shiro Matsumoto, “An Interpretation of Prasanna-
padā, 18.5-19.7." Indian Logic 3 (2011) 277-301.
iren Matsunami, A Catalogue of the Sanskrit
Manuscripts in the Tokyo University Library. Tokyo: Suzuki
Research Foundation, 1965.
May 1959 Jacques May, Candrakīrti. Prasannapada Madhyamaka-
vṛtti. Douze chapitres traduits du sanscrit et du tibétain,
accompagnés d'une introduction, de notes et d'une édition
critique de la version tibétaine. Paris: Adrien-Maisonneuve,
1959.530
May 1980 Id., “Āryadeva et Candrakīrti sur la permanence.” In
Indianisme et Bouddhisme, Mélanges offerts à Mgr Etienne
Lamotte. Louvain: Institut Orientaliste, 1980. 215-232.
May 1991
Id., Review of R. Grünendahl (see Grünendahl 1989).
AS/ÉA 45 (1991) 152.
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Mimaki 1976 Katsumi Mimaki, La réfutation bouddhique de la
permanence des choses (sthirasiddhidūṣaṇa) et la preuve de la
momentanéité des choses (kṣaṇabhangasiddhi). Paris: Institute
de Civilisation Indienne, 1976.
Mitra 1971
-
- R. Mitra, The Sanskrit Buddhist Literature of Nepal.
Calcutta: The Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1882. Reprint Calcutta:
Sanskrit Pustak Bhandar, 1971.
Monier-Williams 1990 — Monier Monier-Williams, A Sanskrit English
Dictionary. Oxford University Press, 1899. Reprint New Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 1990.
Moriyama 2010 - Shinya Moriyama, "On Self-Awareness in the Sau-
trantika Epistemology." JIP 38 (2010) 261-277.
Morris and Hardy 1885-1990 Richard Morris and Edmund Hardy,
ed., Anguttaranikāya. London: PTS, 1885-1900.
Muni Jambuvijayaji 1966 Muni Jambuvijayaji, ed., Dvādaśāram
Nayacakram of Ācārya Śrī Mallavādi Kṣamāśrama, with the
Commentary Nyāyānusāriņī of Śrī Simhasūri Gani Kṣamāśrama.
Bhavnagar: Śrī Jain Ātmanand Sabha, 1966.
Edward Müller, ed., The Dhammasangani. London:
Müller 1885
PTS, 1885.
Murthy 1996 R.S. Shivaganesha Murthy, Introduction to Manuscript-
ology. Delhi: Sharada Publishing House, 1996.
Nagao 1955
G.M. Nagao, "The Silence of the Buddha and its
Madhyamic Interpretation." In Studies in Indology and Buddho-
logy Presented in Honour of Professor Susumu Yamaguchi on
the Occasion of his Sixtieth Birthday. Ed. G.M. Nagao and J.
Nozawa. Kyoto: Hozokan, 1955. 137-151.
Nagasaki 1991 — H. Nagasaki, "Perception in Pre-Dignāga Buddhist
Texts." In Studies in the Buddhist Epistemological Tradition.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
531
Proceedings of the Second International Dharmakirti Confer-
ence. Vienna June 11-16, 1989. Ed. E. Steinkellner. Vienna:
AASP, 1991. 221-225.
Nagao 1964 - G.M. Nagao, Madhyāntavibhāga-bhāṣya. Tokyo: Suzuki
Research Foundation, 1964.
Nagatomi 1979 — M. Nagatomi, “Mānasa-Pratyakṣa: A Conundrum in
the Buddhist Pramāṇa System." In Sanskrit and Indian Studies:
Essays in Honour of Daniel H.H. Ingalls. Ed. M. Nagatomi, B.K
Matilal, J.M. Masson and E.C. Dimock. Dordrecht: D. Reidel
Publishing, 1979. 243-260.
Nakamura 1980 H. Nakamura, "The Theory of 'Dependent Origina-
tion' in its Incipent Stage." In Buddhist Studies in honour of
Walpola Rahula. Ed. S. Balasooriya et al. London: Gordon
Frazer, 1980. 165-172.
Ñāṇamoli and Bodhi 1995 — Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli and Bhikkhu Bodhi,
tr., The Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha. Boston:
Wisdom Publications, 1995.
Nath 1987 R.N. Nath, The Aṣṭādhyāyī of Panini. New Delhi:
Munshiram Manoharlal, 1987.
Naudou 1980 - Jean Naudou, Buddhists of Kaśmir. Tr. G. Brereton and
C. Picron. Delhi: Agam Kala Prakashan, 1980.
Negi 1998 J.S. Negi, Tibetan-Sanskrit Dictionary. Sarnath: Central
Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies, 1998.
Nietupski 1996- Paul Nietupski, "The Examination of Conditioned
Entities and the Examination of Reality. Nāgārjuna's Prajñā-
nāma Mūlamadhyamakakārika XIII, Bhāvaviveka’s Prajñā-
pradīpa XIII, and Candrakīrti's Prasannapadā XIII.” JIP 24
(1996) 103-143.
Norman 1969 K. Norman, Elders' Verses I. Theragāthā. London:
Luzac, 1969.
Norman 1992 - Id., The Group of Discourses (Sutta-Nipāta). Vol. II.
Revised Translation with Introduction and Notes. Oxford: Pali
Text Society, 1992.532
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Nyanatiloka 1975 - Nyanatiloka, tr., Visuddhi-Magga oder Der Weg
zur Reinheit. 3rd ed. Konstanz: Verlag Christiani, 1975.
Oberhammer 1991
Id., Terminologie der frühen philosophischen
Scholastik in Indien. Ein Begriffswörterbuch zur altindischen
Dialektik, Erkenntnislehre und Methodologie. Unter Mitarbeit
von Ernst Prets und Joachim Prandstetter. Band 1: A-I. Vienna:
AASP, 1991.
Oberhammer 1996 Id., Terminologie der frühen philosophischen
Scholastik in Indien. Ein Begriffswörterbuch zur altindischen
Dialektik, Erkenntnislehre und Methodologie. Unter Mitarbeit
von Ernst Prets und Joachim Prandstetter. Band 2: U-Pū.
Vienna: AASP, 1996.
Oberlies 1995 Thomas Oberlies, "Beiträge zur Pali-Lexikographie
(Miscellanea Palica II).” IIJ 38 (1995) 105-147.
Oberlies 2001
Id., Pāli. A Grammar of the Language of the
Theravada Tipiṭaka. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2001.
Obermiller 1932
Eugène Obermiller, History of Buddhism by Bu-
ston. Heidelberg: Harrasowitz, 1932.
Oetke 1988 Claus Oetke, "Die metaphysische Lehre Nāgārjunas."
Conceptus, Zeitschrift für Philosophie XXII/56 (1988) 47-64.
Oetke 1989 Id., “Rationalismus und Mystik in der Philosophie Nā-
garjunas." In StII 15 (1989) 1-39.
Oetke 1990- Id., "On some non-formal aspects of the proofs of the
Madhyamakakārikās." In Earliest Buddhism and Madhyamaka.
Ed. D. Ruegg and L. Schmithausen. Leiden: Brill, 1990. 90-109.
Oetke 1991 Id., "Remarks on the Interpretation of Nāgārjuna's philo-
sophy." JIP 19 (1991) 319-320.
-
Oetke 1992 - Id., "Pragmatic Implicatures and Text-Interpretation (The
Alleged Logical Error of the Negation of the Antecedent in the
Mūlamadhyamakakārikās).” StII 16 (1992) 185-233.
Oetke 1994 Id., “Die ‘Unbeantworteten Fragen' und das Schweigen
des Buddha." In WZKS 38 (1994) 85-120.
Oetke 1996 - Id., “Nihilist' and 'non-nihilist' interpretations of Ma-
dhyamaka." Acta Orientalia 57 (1996) 57-104.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
533
Oetke 2001a — Id., Materialien zur Übersetzung und Interpretation der
Mūlamadhyamakakārikās. Reinbek: Verlag für Orientalistische
Fachpublikationen, 2001.
Oetke 2001b - Id., Zur akademischen Krise in der Indologie und den
Möglichkeiten ihrer Überwindung. Stockholm, 2001.
Oetke 2003 · Id., "Prasannapadā 19,3-7 and Its Context." WZKS 47
(2003) 111-142.
Oetke 2004 Id., On "Nāgārjuna's Logic." In Gedenkschrift J.W. de
Jong. Ed. H.W. Bodewitz and Minoru Hara. Tokyo: The
International Institute for Buddhist Studies, 2004. 83-98.
Oetke 2006 Id., Logic Matters in the Prasannapadā. A Study on
Reasoning and Proof in Metaphysics. Stockholm: Acta
Universitatis Stockholmiensis, 2006.
Oetke 2009 - Id., "Some Issues of Scholarly Exegesis (in Indian Phil-
osophy)." JIP 37 (2009) 415-497.
Oldenberg 1879-1883- H. Oldenberg, Vinaya-piṭaka. London: PTS,
1879-1883.
Otsuka 1997
Nobuo Otsuka, "The Script of the Amogha-
pāśakalparāja Sanskrit Palm-leaf Manuscript." In Introduction
to the Facsimile Edition of the Amoghapāśakalparāja Sanskrit
Palm-leaf Manuscript. Tokyo: The Institute for Comprehensive
Studies of Buddhism, Taisho University, 1997. 17-39.
Padmakara 2002 Padmakara Translation Group, Introduction to the
Middle Way. Chandrakirti's Madhyamakavatara with commen-
tary by Jamgön Mipham. Boston: Shambala Publications, 2002.
-
Pandeya 1988 R. Pandeya, The Madhyamakaśāstram of Nagarjuna
with the Commentaries Akutobhayā by Nagarjuna, Madhyama-
kavrtti by Buddhapālita, Prajñāpradīpavrtti by Bhāvaviveka,
Prasannapadāvṛtti by Candrakīrti critically reconstructed. Vol.
I. Delhi, Motilal Banarsidass, 1988.
Panglung 1981 Jampa Losang Panglung, Die Erzählstoffe des
Mūlasarvāstivāda-Vinaya. Analysiert auf Grund der tibetischen
Übersetzung. Tokyo: Reiyukai, 1981.534
Pant 2000
Mahes Raj Pant, Jātarūpa's Commentary on the
Amarakosa. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2000.
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Pasādika 1979 Bhikkhu Pasādika, “The Dharma-Discourse of the
Great Collection of Jewels. The Kāśyapa-Section. Mahāratna-
kūṭadharmaparyāya - Kāśyapaparivarta. English Translation and
Restoration of the Missing Sanskrit Portions (VII, IX).” Linh-
Son publication d'études bouddhologiques 7 & 9 (1979) 27-37;
26-41.
Pasādika 1989 Id., Kanonische Zitate im Abhidharmakośabhāṣya des
Vasubandhu. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1989.
Pind 2001 - Ole H. Pind, "Why the Vaidalyaprakaraṇa Cannot Be an
Authentic Work of Nāgārjuna." WZKS 45 (2001) 149-172.
Pind 2009
Id., Dignāga's Philosophy of Language. Dignāga on
anyāpoha. Pramāṇasamuccaya V: Texts, Translation and Anno-
tation. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Vienna, 2009.
Pradhan 1975 - P. Pradhan, Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam of Vasubandhu.
2nd ed. Patna: K.P. Jayaswal Research Institute, 1975.
Preisendanz 1994
K. Preisendanz, Studien zu Nyāyasūtra III.1 mit
dem Nyāyatattvāloka Vācaspati Miśras II. Stuttgart: Franz
Steiner Verlag, 1994.
Proto 2010 Teresa Proto, "Speech and scribal errors as a window into
the mind. Evidence for mechanisms of speech (re)production
and systems of mental representations." Cognitive Philology 3
(2010).
URL:
http://ojs.uniroma1.it/index.php/cogphil/article/view/9347/9229
(accessed Aug. 20, 2013).
Python 1973 Pierre Python, Vinaya-Viniscaya-Upāli-Paripṛcchā.
Enquête d'Upāli pour une exégèse de la discipline. Paris:
Adrien-Maisonneuve, 1973.
Qvarnström 1990- Olle Qvarnström, "The Vedāntatattvaviniścaya-
Chapter of Bhavya's Madhyamakahṛdayakārikā." WZKS 34
(1990) 181-198.
Raghavan 1998 - V. Raghavan, Sanskrit Rāmāyaṇas Other than
Vālmīki's: The Adbhuta, Adhyatma, and Ananda Rāmāyaṇas.
Chennai: Dr. V. Raghavan Centre for Performing Arts, 1998.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Rajbanshi 1974 Shankar Man Rajbanshi, “The Evolution of Deva-
nagari Script." Kailash 2 (1974) 23-120.
535
Randle 1976 - H.N. Randle, Indian Logic in the Early Schools. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1930. Indian ed.: New Delhi: Munshi-
ram Manoharlal, 1976.
Renou 1957
L. Renou, Terminologie Grammaticale du Sanskrit.
Paris: Champion, 1957.
Renou and Filliozat 1953 — L. Renou and J. Filliozat, L'Inde Classique.
Paris: Imprimerie Nationale, 1953.
Reynolds and Wilson 1974 - L.D. Reynolds and N.G. Wilson, Scribes
and Scholars: A Guide to the Transmission of Greek and Latin
Literature. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1974.
Rhys Davids and Carpenter 1890-1911 - T.W. Rhys Davids and J.E.
Carpenter, ed., Dīghanikāya. London: PTS, 1890-1911.
Rhys Davids, Carpenter and Stede 1886-1932 — T.W. Rhys Davids, J.E.
Carpenter and W. Stede, ed., Dīghanikāya-Aṭṭhakathā (Su-
mangalavilāsini). London: PTS, 1886-1932.
Rizzi 1988
Rhys Davids and Stede 1993 T.W. Rhys Davids and William Stede,
The Pali Text Society's Pali-English Dictionary. Chipstead,
1921-1925. Reprint Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1993.
Cesare Rizzi, Candrakīrti. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsi-
dass, 1988.
Roerich and Choepel 1988- George Roerich and Gedun Choepel, The
Blue Annals by Gö Lotsawa. Motilal Banarsidass,
von Rospatt 1995 Alexander von Rospatt, The Buddhist Doctrine of
Momentariness. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1995.
Saito 1984 Akira Saito, A Study of the Buddhapalita-mulamadhya-
maka-vṛtti. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Australian National
University, 1984.
Saito 1985 — Id., “Textcritical Remarks on the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā
as Cited in the Prasannapadā." JIBS 33 (1985) 846-842.
Saito 1986 — Id., "A Note on the Prajñā-nāma-mūlamadhyamakakārikā
of Nāgārjuna." JIBS 35 (1986) 487-484.536
Saito 1995 — Id., “Problems in Translating the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā
as Cited in its Commentaries." In Buddhist Translations:
Problems and Perspectives. Ed. Doboom Tulku. Delhi:
Manohar, 1995. 87-96.
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Saito 1998 Id., "Bhäviveka and the Madhya(anta)vibhāga/-bhāṣya."
JIBS 46 (1998) 23-29.
Śākya 1956 - Hem Rāj Śākya, Nepāla lipi-samgraha. Kathmandu:
Basantrāj Tuladhar, 1956.
Śākya 1973 Id., Nepāla lipi-prakāśa. Kathmandu: Nepāla Rājakīya
Prajña-Pratiṣṭhāna, 1973.
Salvini 2011 Mattia Salvini, "Upādāyaprajñapti and the Meaning of
Absolutives: Grammar and Syntax in the Interpretation of
Madhyamaka." JIP 39 (2011) 229-244.
Samten and Garfield 2006 Geshe Ngawang Samten and Jay Garfield,
Ocean of Reasoning. A Great Commentary on Nagarjuna's Mū-
lamadhyamakakārikā. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
Sander 1968 Lore Sander, Paläographisches zu den Sanskrit-hand-
schriften der Berliner Turfansammlung. Wiesbaden: Steiner,
1968.
-
Sānkṛtyāyana 1937 Rāhula Sānkṛtyāyana, “Vigrahavyāvarttanī.”
Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society 23 (1937),
Appendix.
Sānkṛtyāyana 1953
Id., ed., Pramāṇavārtikabhāṣyam or
Vārtikālankāraḥ of Prajñākaragupta. Patna: Kashi Prasad
Jayaswal Research Institute, 1953.
della Santina 1986
Peter della Santina, Madhyamaka Schools in
India. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1986.
Sarma 1982 - K.V. Sarma, “Manuscriptology and Textual Criticism in
Medieval India." Indologica Taurinensia 10 (1982) 281-288.
Śāstri 1915 Hara Prasad Śāstri, A Catalogue of Palm-Leaf & Selected
Paper MSS. Belonging to the Durbar Library, Nepal. Vol. II.
Calcutta: Baptist Mission Press, 1915.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
-
537
Śāstri 1978- Svāmī Dvārikādāsa Śāstri, Ślokavārttika of Śrī Kumarila
Bhaṭṭa with the Commentary Nyayaratnākara of Śrī Pārthasārthi
Miśra. Varanasi: Ratna Publications, 1978.
Śāstri 1981 Id., Tattvasamgraha of Ācārya Shantarakṣita with the
Commentary "Pañjikā” of Shri Kamalashīla. Varanasi: Bauddha
Bharati, 1981.
Śāstri 1987 Id., Abhidharmakośa & Bhasya of Vasubandhu with
Sphutārtha Commentary of Yasomitra. Varanasi: Bauddha
Bharati, 1987.
Schaeffer 2009- – Kurtis R. Schaeffer, The Culture of the Book in Tibet.
New York: Columbia University Press, 2009.
Schayer 1930 Stanislaw Schayer, "Feuer und Brennstoff." Rocznik
Orjentalistyczny 7 (1930) 26-52.
Schayer 1931 Id., Ausgewählte Kapitel aus der Prasannapadā (V,
XII, XIII, XIV, XV, XVI) Einleitung, Übersetzung und Anmer-
kungen. Krakow: Nakladem Polskiej Akademji Umiejętności,
1931.
Scherrer-Schaub 1981 Cristina Scherrer-Schaub, "Le Terme Yukti:
Premiére Étude." AS/ÉA 35 (1981) 185-199.
Scherrer-Schaub 1991 Id., Yuktişastikāvṛtti. Commentaire à la
soixantaine sur le raisonnement ou Du vrai enseignement de la
causalité par le Maître indien Candrakīrti. Brussels: Institut
Belge des Hautes Études Chinoises, 1991.
Schmithausen 1969 Lambert Schmithausen, Der Nirvāṇa-Abschnitt
in der Viniscayasamgrahānī der Yogācārabhūmiḥ. Vienna:
AASP, 1969.
Schmithausen 1972 – Id., “The Definition of Pratyakṣam in the Abhi-
dharmasamuccayaḥ." WZKSO 16 (1972) 153-163.
Schmithausen 1976 — Id., "Die Vier Konzentrationen der Aufmerksam-
keit." Zeitschrift für Missionswissenschaft und Religions-
wissenschaft (1976) 241-266.
Schmithausen 1977
Id., "Zur buddhistischen Lehre von der Drei-
fachen Leidhaftigkeit." Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgen-
ländischen Gesellschaft (1977) 918-930.538
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Schmithausen 1981 Id., "On Some Aspects of Descriptions or
Theories of 'Liberating Insight' and 'Enlightenment' in Early
Buddhism." In Studium zum Jainismus und Buddhismus.
Gedenkschrift für Ludwig Alsdorf. Ed. K. Bruhn, A. Wezler.
Wiesbaden: Franz-Steiner Verlag, 1981. 199-250.
Schmithausen 1987a - Id., "Alayavijñāna. On the Origin and the Early
Development of a Central Concept of Yogācāra Philosophy.
Tokyo: The International Institute for Buddhist Studies, 1987.
Schmithausen 1987b Id., Review of Heinz Bechert (ed.) Sanskrit-
Wörterbuch der buddhistischen Texte aus den Turfan-Funden.
ZDMG 137 (1987) 151-157.
Schmithausen 1997
Id., "The Early Buddhist Tradition and
Ecological Ethics." Journal of Buddhist Ethics 4 (1997) 1-74.
Schmithausen 2000a — Id., “Buddhism and the Ethics of Nature-Some
Remarks." The Eastern Buddhist 32 (2000) 26-78.
Schmithausen 2000b
Id., "Gleichmut und Mitgefühl.” In Der Bud-
dhismus als Anfrage an christliche Theologie und Philosophie.
Mödling: Verlag St. Gabriel, 2000. 119-136.
Schmithausen 2000c - Id., "Mitleid und Leerheit." In Der Buddhismus
als Anfrage an christliche Theologie und Philosophie. Mödling:
Verlag St. Gabriel, 2000. 437-455.
Schmithausen 2000d — Id., "Zur zwölfgliedrigen Formel des Entstehens
in Abhängigkeit." Hōrin 7 (2000) 41-76.
Schmithausen 2013
Id., "Kusala and Akusala: Reconsidering the
Original Meaning of a Basic Pair of Terms of Buddhist Spiri-
tuality and Ethics and Its Development up to Early Yogācāra."
In The Foundation for Yoga Practitioners. The Buddhist
Yogācārabhūmi Treatise and Its Adaptation in India, East Asia,
and Tibet. Boston: Department of South Asian Studies, Harvard
University, 2013. 440-495.
-
Schmithausen 2014 - Id., The Genesis of Yogācāra-Vijñānavāda.
Responses and Reflections. Tokyo: The International Institute
for Buddhist Studies, 2014.
Schoening 1995 Jeffrey Schoening, The Salistamba Sutra and its
Indian Commentaries. Vienna: ATBS, 1995.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
539
Seyfort Ruegg 1971 - David Seyfort Ruegg, "Le Dharmadhātustava de
Nagarjuna." In Études tibétaines dédiées à la mémoire de
Marcelle Lalou. Paris: Adrien Maisonneuve, 1971. 448-471.
Seyfort Ruegg 1977 — Id., “The uses of the four positions of the catuṣ-
koti and the problem of the description of reality in Mahāyāna
Buddhism." JIP 5 (1977) 1-71.
Seyfort Ruegg 1981-Id., The Literature of the Madhyamaka School of
Philosophy in India. Published as fasc. 1, vol. VII of A History
of Indian Literature, ed. J. Gonda. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz,
1981.
Seyfort Ruegg 1982 Id., "Towards a chronology of the Madhyamaka
school." In Indological and Buddhist Studies. Volume in honour
of Professor J. W. de Jong on his sixtieth birthday. Ed. L. Hercus
et al. Canberra: Faculty of Asian Studies, Australian National
University, 1982. 505-530.
Seyfort Ruegg 1983 Id., "On the Thesis and Assertion in the Ma-
dhyamaka/dBu ma." In Contributions on Tibetan and Buddhist
Religion and Philosophy. Proceedings of the Csoma de Köros
Symposium held at Velm-Vienna, 13-19 Sept. 1981. Ed. E. Stein-
kellner and H. Tauscher. Vienna: ATBS, 1983. Vol. 2, 205-241.
-
Seyfort Ruegg 1985 Id., "Purport, Implicature and Presupposition:
Sanskrit Abhiprāya and Tibetan dGons pa/dGons gzhi as Her-
meneutical Concepts." JIP 13 (1985) 309-325.
Seyfort Ruegg 1986 Id., "Does the Madhyamika have a thesis and
philosophical position?" In Buddhist logic and epistemology. Ed.
B.K. Matilal and R.D. Evans. Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing,
1986. 229-237.
Seyfort Ruegg 1990 Id., "On the authorship of some works ascribed
to Bhāvaviveka/Bhavya." In Earliest Buddhism and Madhya-
maka. Panels of the VIIth World Sanskrit Conference 2. Ed. D.
Seyfort Ruegg and L. Schmithausen. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1990.
59-71.
Seyfort Ruegg 1991 — Id., "On pramāṇa Theory in Tson kha pa's Ma-
dhyamaka Philosophy." In Studies in the Buddhist Epistemo-
logical Tradition. Proceedings of the Second International540
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Dharmakīrti Conference. Vienna June 11-16, 1989. Ed. E.
Steinkellner. Vienna: AASP, 1991. 281-310.
Seyfort Ruegg 2000 Id., Three Studies in the History of Indian and
Tibetan Madhyamaka Philosophy. Vienna: ATBS, 2000.
Seyfort Ruegg 2002 Id., Two Prolegomena to Madhyamaka
Philosophy. Candrakīrti's Prasannapada Madhyamakavṛttiḥ on
Madhyamakakārikā I.1 and Tson kha pa blo bzań grags pa /
rGyal tshab Dar ma rin chen's dKa' gnad/gnas brgyad kyi zin
bris. Vienna: ATBS, 2002.
Shackleton Bailey 1951 D.R. Shackleton Bailey, The Śātapañcāśatka
of Matṛceta. Sanskrit Text, Tibetan Translation & Commentary
and Chinese Translation. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1951.
Sharan 1978 Mahesh K. Sharan, Court Procedure in Ancient India.
New Delhi: Abhinav Publications, 1978.
Sharma et al. 1969 — A. Sharma, K. Deshpande, D.G. Padhye. Kāśikā:
A Commentary on Panini's Grammar. Hyderabad: Osmania
University Press, 1969.
Sharma 1985 — P. S. Sharma, “What Kind of Compound is the Word
pratyakṣa?" The Adyar Library Bulletin 49 (1985) 14-29.
Siderits 1981
Mark Siderits, "The Madhyamaka Critique of
Epistemology II." Journal of Indian Philosophy 9 (1981) 121-
160.
Siderits 2011 Id., "Is Everything Connected to Everything Else?
What the Gopis Know." In Moonshadows: Conventional Truth
in Buddhist Philosophy. Ed. The Cowherds. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2011.
Siderits and Katsura 2013. Mark Siderits and Shoryu Katsura, Nāgār-
juna's Middle Way. Mulamadhyamakakārikā. Boston: Wisdom
Publications, 2013.
Lilian Silburn, Instant et Cause. Paris: De Boccard,
Silburn 1989
1989.
Skilling 1991 Peter Skilling, “A Brief Guide to the Golden Tanjur."
The Journal of the Siam Society 79 (1991) 138-146.541
Skilling 1998 Id., "The Sutra on the Four Conditions." WZKS 42
(1998) 139-149.
Slaje 1993 Walter Slaje, Śāradā: Deskriptiv-synchrone Schriftkunde
zur Bearbeitung kaschmirischer Sanskrit-Manuskripte. Reinbek:
Verlag für Orientalistische Fachpublikationen, 1993.
Sprung 1979 Mervyn Sprung, Lucid Exposition of the Middle Way:
The Essential Chapters from the Prasannapadā of Candrakīrti.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1979.
von
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Staël-Holstein 1977
A. von Staël-Holstein, The
Kaśyapaparivarta: A Mahayānasutra of the Ratnakūṭa class
edited in the original Sanskrit, in Tibetan and in Chinese.
Shanghai, 1926. Reprint Tokyo: Meicho-Fukyū-Kai, 1977.
Stalker 1987 Susan Stalker, A Study of Dependent Origination: Vasu-
bandhu, Buddhaghosa, and the Interpretation of "Pratītyasam-
utpāda." Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Pennsylvania, 1987.
Stanley 1988 Richard Stanley, A Study of the Madhyāntavibhāga-
Bhāṣya-Tīkā. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Australian
National University, 1988.
Stcherbatsky 1927 T. Stcherbatsky, The Conception of Buddhist
Nirvāṇa. Leningrad: Publishing Office of the Academy of
Sciences of the USSR, 1927.
-
Stcherbatsky 1962 — Id., Buddhist Logic. St. Petersburg, 1930. Reprint
New York: Dover Publications, 1962.
Stcherbatsky 1992 Id., Madhyānta-vibhanga. Discourse on
Discrimination between Middle and Extremes. St. Petersburg,
1936. Reprint New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1992.
Steiner 1996
Roland Steiner, "Die Lehre der Anustubh bei den
indischen Metrikern." In: Suhṛllekhāḥ. Festgabe für Helmut
Eimer. Ed. M. Hahn, J.-U. Hartmann, R. Steiner. Swisttal-
Odendorf: Indica et Tibetica Verlag, 1996. 227-248.
Steinkellner 1961
Ernst Steinkellner, "Die Literatur des Älteren
Nyāya." WZKS 5 (1961) 149-162.542
Steinkellner 1988 Id., "Remarks on Niścitagrahaṇa." In Orientalia
Josephi Tucci Memoriae Dicata. Rome: Istituto Italiano il
Medio ed Estremo Oriente, 1988. 1427-1444.
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Steinkellner 1990 - · Id., “Is Dharmakīrti a Mādhyamika?” In Earliest
Buddhism and Madhyamaka. Ed. D. Ruegg and L.
Schmithausen. Leiden: Brill, 1990. 72-90.
Steinkellner 1992 — Id., "Lamotte and the Concept of anupalabdhi."
AS/ÉA 46 (1992) 398-410.
Steinkellner 2005 Id., Dignāga's Pramāṇasamuccaya, Chapter 1. A
hypothetical reconstruction of the Sanskrit text with the help of
the two Tibetan translations on the basis of the hitherto known
Sanskrit fragments and the linguistic materials gained from
Jinendrabuddhi's Tīkā. Vienna, 2005. URL: http://ikga.oeaw.-
ac.at/Mat/dignaga_PS_1.pdf (accessed Aug. 20, 2013)
Steinkellner et al. 2005 E. Steinkellner, H. Krasser, H. Lasic, ed., Ji-
nendrabuddhi's Viśālāmalavatī Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā, Chap-
ter 1. Beijing-Vienna: China Tibetology Publishing House &
AASP, 2005.
Streng 1967
Frederick Streng, Emptiness: A Study in Religious
Meaning. Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1967.
Suzuki 1995 - K. Suzuki, "The Script of the Śrāvakabhūmi
Manuscript." In Studies on the Buddhist Sanskrit Literature. Ed.
The Śrāvakabhūmi Study Group and the Buddhist Tantric Text
Study Group. Tokyo: Sankibo Press, 1995. 21-38.
Suzuki 1996 — Id., ed., Sanskrit Fragments and Tibetan Translation of
Candrakīrti's Bodhisattvayogācāracatuḥśatakaṭīkā. Tokyo:
Sankibo, 1996.
Tachikawa 1971 - M. Tachikawa, "A Sixth-Century Manual of Indian
Logic." JIP 1 (1971) 111-145.
Tachikawa 1981 Id., "Pratītyasamutpāda' in the Dedication of the
Mulamadhyamakakārikā." Adyar Library Bulletin 44-45 (1980-
1981) Dr. K. Kunjunni Raja Felicitation Volume. 639-653.
-
Takaoka 1981 - H. Takaoka, A Microfilm Catalogue of the Buddhist
Manuscripts in Nepal. Vol 1. Nagoya: Buddhist Library, 1981.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
543
Tanji 1988- Teruyoshi Tanji, Akirakana kotoba I (Prasannapadā
Madhyamakavṛtti I). Osaka: Kansai University Press, 1988.
Tanji 1992 Id., Jitsuzai to ninshiki. Chūgan shiso kenkyū II (Reality
and Cognition. Study of Madhyamika Philosophy II). Osaka:
Kansai University Press, 1992.
Tanselle 1990 G. Thomas Tanselle, Textual Criticism and Scholarly
Editing. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1990.
Tatia 1976 - Nathmal Tatia, Abhidharmasamuccaya-Bhāṣyam. Patna:
Kashi Prasad Jayaswal Research Institute, 1976.
Tauscher 1981 Helmut Tauscher, Candrakīrti. Madhyamakãāvatāraḥ
und Madhyamakāvatārabhāṣyam (Kapital VI, Vers 166-226).
Vienna: ATBS, 1981.
Thakchoe 2010 Sonam Thakchoe, "Candrakīrti's theory of percep-
tion: A case for non-foundationalist epistemology in Madhya-
maka." Acta Orientalia Vilnensia 11 (2010) 93-124.
Thakur 1997a - Anantalal Thakur, Gautamīyanyāyadarśana with
Bhāṣya of Vatsyāyana. New Delhi: Indian Council of Philoso-
phical Research, 1997.
Thakur 1997b - Id., Nyāyabhāṣyavārttika of Bhāradvāja Uddyotakara.
New Delhi: Indian Council of Philosophical Research, 1997.
Thurman 1991 Robert Thurman, The Central Philosophy of Tibet. A
Study and Translation of Jey Tsong Khapa's Essence of True
Eloquence. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984. Reprint
1991.
Tillemans 1984
Tikkanen 1987- Bertil Tikkanen, The Sanskrit Gerund. A Synchronic,
Diachronic and Typological Analysis. Helsinki: Finnish Oriental
Society, 1987.
Tom J.F. Tillemans, "Sur le Pararthanumāna en
Logique Bouddhique." AS/ÉA 38 (1984) 73-99.
Tillemans 1989 Id., “Indian and Tibetan Madhyamikas on Mānasa-
pratyakṣa." The Tibet Journal 14 (1989) 70-85.
Tillemans 1990 - Id., Materials for the Study of Aryadeva, Dharmapāla
and Candrakirti. Vienna: ATBS, 1990.544
Tillemans 1991
Id., "More on Parārthānumāna, Theses and
Syllogisms" AS/ÉA 45 (1991) 133-148.
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Tillemans 1992
Id., "Tsong kha pa et al. on the Bhavaviveka-
Candrakīrti Debate." In Tibetan Studies: Proceedings of the 5th
Seminar of the International Association for Tibetan Studies. Ed.
S. Ihara and Z. Yamaguchi. Narita: Narita-san Shinsho-ji, 1992.
315-326.
-
Tillemans 1994 Id., "Pre-Dharmakīrti Commentators on Dignāga's
Definition of a Thesis (pakṣalakṣaṇa)." In The Buddhist Forum
3. Ed. T. Skorupski and U. Pagel. University of London, 1994.
295-305.
Tillemans 1998 Id., "A Note on Pramāņavārttika, Pramāṇasamucca-
ya and Nyāyamukha. What is the svadharmin in Buddhist
logic?" JIABS 21 (1998) 111-124.
Tillemans 2000 Id., Dharmakīrti's Pramāṇavārttika. An annotated
translation of the fourth chapter (parārthānumāna). Vienna:
AASP, 2000.
Tillemans and Lopez 1998 Tom J.F. Tillemans and Donald Lopez,
"What can one reasonably say about non-existence? A Tibetan
work on the problem of aśrayasiddha." JIP 26 (1998) 99-129.
TKK 2001 - Tohōgakuin Kansaichiku Kyōshitsu, ed., Criticism of
Dignāga's Epistemology by Candrakīrti: Tibetan Translation of
the Prasannapadā, Japanese Translation and Index. Kyoto:
Hōzōkan, 2001.
Tosaki 1987 Hiromasa Tosaki, Review of Amar Singh, The Heart of
Buddhist Philosophy: Dinnāga and Dharmakīrti. IIJ 30 (1987)
139-146.
Trenckner and Chalmers 1888-1899 — V. Trenckner and R. Chalmers,
ed., Majjhimanikāya. London: PTS, 1888-1899.
Trenckner et al. 1924-2011 V. Trenckner, D. Anderson et al., A
Critical Pali Dictionary. Copenhagen: The Royal Danish Royal
Academy of Sciences and Letters, 1924-2001 and Bristol 2011.
Trier 1972 Jesper Trier, Ancient Paper of Nepal: Results of ethno-
technological field work on its manufacture, uses and history,PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
with technical analyses of bast, paper and manuscripts.
Copenhagen: Gyldendal, 1972.
Tsukamoto et al. 1990
K. Tsukamoto, Y. Matsunaga, H. Isoda, A
Descriptive Bibliography of the Sanskrit Buddhist Literature.
Vol. 3: Abhidharma, Madhyamaka, Yogācāra, Buddhist epistem-
ology and logic. Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten, 1990.
545
Tucci 1929 Giuseppe Tucci, "Buddhist Logic before Dinnaga." JRAS
(1929) 451-488.
Tucci 1930 Id., The Nyāyamukha of Dignāga. Heidelberg 1930.
Tucci 1981 Id., Pre-Dinnāga Buddhist Texts on Logic from Chinese
Sources. Baroda 1929. Reprint Madras: Vesta Publications,
1981.
Tuck 1990 Andrew P. Tuck, Comparative Philosophy and the
Philosophy of Scholarship. On the Western Interpretation of
Nāgārjuna. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990.
-
Uryuzu and Nakazawa 2012 — Ryushin Uryuzu and Mitsuru Nakazawa,
Tibetan edition of the Madhyamakāvatārabhāṣya, 2012.
http://goo.gl/dhvSLA (accessed Feb. 26, 2014).
Vaidya 1960a - P.L. Vaidya, ed., Aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā.
Darbhanga: The Mithila Institute, 1960.
Vaidya 1961
Vaidya 1960b - Id., ed., Madhyamakaśāstra of Nagarjuna with the
Commentary Prasannapada by Candrakīrti. Darbhanga: The
Mithila Institute, 1960.
Id., Samadhirajasūtra. Darbhanga: The Mithila
Institute, 1961.
Vasu 1980
Śrisa Chandra Vasu, The Ashtadhyāyī of Pāṇini.
Allahabad 1891. Reprint Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1980.
Verhagen 1985
Peter Verhagen, "Tibetan Expertise in Sanskrit
Grammar. A Case-Study: Grammatical Analysis of the Term
pratītya-samutpāda." The Journal of the Tibet Society 8 (1985)
21-48.
Vetter 1982 Tilmann Vetter, "Die Lehre Nāgārjunas in den Mula-
madhyamaka-kārikās." In Epiphanie des Heils. Zur Heils-546
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
gegenwart in indischer und christlicher Religion. Ed. Gerhard
Oberhammer. Vienna: Gerold, 1982. 87-108.
Vetter 1988
Id., The Ideas and Meditative Practices of Early
Buddhism. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1988.
Vetter 1992 Id., “On the Authenticity of the Ratnāvalī. AS/ÉA 46
(1992) 492-506.
Vetter 2000 Id., The "Khandha Passages" in the Vinayapiṭaka and
the four main Nikayas. Vienna: AASP, 2000.
Vetter 2001 — Id., “Once again on the Origin of Mahāyāna Buddhism.”
WZKS 45 (2001) 59-90.
Vogel 1926 Jean Philippe Vogel, Indian Serpent-Lore. London:
Arthur Probsthain, 1926.
Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 2002 M. I. Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya,
The Kāśyapaparivarta. Romanized Text and Facsimiles. Tokyo:
The International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology,
Soka University, 2002.
Vose 2009
Kevin Vose, Resurrecting Candrakīrti. Disputes in the
Tibetan Creation of Prāsangika. Boston: Wisdom Publications,
2009.
Wackernagel and Debrunner 1954 Jacob Wackernagel and Albert
Debrunner, Altindische Grammatik II.2. Nominalsuffixe.
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1954.
Walleser 1911 - Max Walleser, Die buddhistische Philosophie in ihrer
geschichtlichen Entwicklung. Vol. 2, Die Mittlere Lehre
(Madhyamika-śāstra) des Nāgārjuna. Heidelberg: Winter, 1911.
Walleser 1914 - Id., Prajñāpradīpa: A Commentary on the
Madhyamaka Sūtra by Bhavaviveka. Calcutta: Asiatic Society of
Bengal, 1914.
Walshe 1987 - Maurice Walshe, The Long Discourses of the Buddha. A
Translation of the Digha Nikaya. London: Wisdom Publications,
1987.
Wangchuk 2002 - Dorji Wangchuk, The cittotpada Chapter of the
Bodhisattvabhumi. Unpublished M.A. thesis. University of
Hamburg, 2002.547
Wangchuk 2007 — Id., The Resolve to Become a Buddha. A Study of the
Bodhicitta Concept in Indo-Tibetan Buddhism. Tokyo: The
International Institute for Buddhist Studies, 2007.
Watanabe 1998 Chikafume Watanabe, "A Translation of the Ma-
dhyamakahṛdayakārikā with the Tarkajvālā III. 137-146.”
JIABS 21 (1998) 125-155.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Watanabe 2013
Toshikazu Watanabe, “Dignāga on Avīta and
Prasanga." JIBS 61 (2013) 1229-1235.
Wayman 1961 Alex Wayman, Analysis of the Śravakabhūmi
Manuscript. Berkley: University of California Press, 1961.
Weber-Brosamer and Back 1997
B. Weber-Brosamer and D.M.
Back, Die Philosophie der Leere. Nāgārjunas Mulamadhyama-
ka-Kārikās Übersetzung des buddhistischen Basistextes mit
kommentierenden Einführung. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1997.
Weller 1965 - Friedrich Weller, Zum Kasyapaparivarta. Vol. 2:
Verdeutschung des sanskrit-tibetischen Textes. Berlin:
Akademie Verlag, 1965.
Weller 1987a - Id., "Kaśyapaparivarta nach der Han-Fassung
verdeutscht." In Friedrich Weller. Kleine Schriften. Ed. W. Rau.
Stuttgart: Steiner Verlag, 1987. 1136-1304.
Weller 1987b — Id., “Die Sung-Fassung des Kāśyapaparivarta. Versuch
einer Verdeutschung." In Friedrich Weller. Kleine Schriften. Ed.
W. Rau. Stuttgart: Steiner Verlag, 1987. 1305-1459.
West 1973
Martin L. West, Textual Criticism and Editorial
Technique. Stuttgart: B.G. Teubner, 1973.
Westerhoff 2010 Jan Westerhoff, The Dispeller of Disputes. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2010.
Wezler 1990
A. Wezler, "On Two Medical Verses in the Yukti-
dipikā." Journal of the European Ayurvedic Society 1 (1990)
127-148.
Wezler and Motegi 1998 A. Wezler and S. Motegi, Yuktidīpikā: The
Most Significant Commentary on the Samkhyakārikā. Stuttgart:
Franz Steiner Verlag, 1998.548
Willemen et al. 1998 Charles Willemen, Bart Dessein, Collett Cox,
Sarvāstivāda Buddhist Scholasticism. Leiden: Brill, 1998.
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Williams 1998 · Paul Williams, The Reflexive Nature of Awareness: A
Tibetan Madhyamaka Defense. Surrey: Curzon Press, 1998.
Willis 1972
James Willis, Latin Textual Criticism. Urbana: Uni-
versity of Illinois Press, 1972.
Ernst Windisch, ed., Iti-vuttaka. London: PTS 1889.
Windisch 1975
Reprint 1975.
Winternitz and Keith 1905 - M. Winternitz and A.B. Keith, Catalogue
of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Bodleian Library. Vol. II. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1905.
Wogihara 1971a U. Wogihara, Bodhisattvabhūmi. A Statement of
Whole Course of the Bodhisattva (Being Fifteenth Section of
Yogācārabhūmi). Reprint Tokyo: Sankibo, 1971.
Wogihara 1971b — Id., Sphutārthā Abhidharmakośavyākhyā. Tokyo:
Sankibo, 1971.
Wood 1994
Thomas Wood, Nāgārjunian Disputations. A
Philosophical Journey through an Indian Looking-Glass. Hono-
lulu: U. of Hawaii Press, 1994.
Woodward 1937 F.L. Woodward, ed., Samyuttanikaya-Atthakathā
(Sāratthappakäsinī). Vol. III. London: PTS, 1937.
Yamaguchi 1929 S. Yamaguchi, "Pour Écarter Les Vaines
Discussions [Vigraha-vyāvartanī].” JA 215 (1929) 1-68.
-
Yamaguchi 1934— Id., Madhyāntavibhāgaṭīkā. Exposition systématique
du Yogācāravijñaptivāda. Nagoya: Hajinkaku, 1934.
Ye 2007a Shaoyong Ye, "The Mūlamadhyamakakārikā and Buddha-
palita's Commentary (1): Romanized Texts Based on the Newly
Identified Sanskrit Manuscripts from Tibet." ARIRIAB 10 (2007)
117-147; 105-151.
Ye 2007b - Id., "A Re-examination of the Mulamadhyamakakārikā on
the Basis of the Newly Identified Sanskrit Manuscripts from
Tibet." ARIRIAB 10 (2007) 149-170.Ye 2008a Id., "The Mulamadhyamakakārika and Buddhapalita's
Commentary (2): Romanized Texts Based on the Newly
Identified Sanskrit Manuscripts from Tibet." ARIRIAB 11 (2008)
105-151.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Ye 2008b Id., "A Paleographical Study of the Manuscripts of the
Mūlamadhyamakakārikā and Buddhapalita's Commentary."
ARIRIAB 11 (2008) 153-175.
549
Ye 2009 — Id., "A Preliminary Survey of Sanskrit Manuscripts of Ma-
dhyamaka Texts Preserved in the Tibet Autonomous Region." In
Sanskrit manuscripts in China. Proceedings of a panel at the
2008 Beijing Seminar on Tibetan Studies, October 13 to 17. Ed.
Ernst Steinkellner, Duan Qing, Helmut Krasser. Beijing: China
Tibetology Publishing House, 2009. 309-337.
Ye 2011a Id., Zhunglunsong: Fanzanghan Hejiao, Daodu, Yizhu
[Mulamadhyamakakārikā: New Editions of the Sanskrit, Tibetan
and Chinese Versions, with Commentary and a Modern Chinese
Translation]. Shanghai: Zhongxi Book Company, 2011.
Ye 2011b - Id., Zhunglunsong Yu Fohushi: Jiyu Xinfaxian Fanwen
Xieben de Wenxianxue Yanjiu [Mūlamadhyamakakārikā and
Buddhapalita's Commentary: A Philological Study on the Basis
of Newly Identified Sanskrit Manuscripts]. Shanghai: Zhongxi
Book Company, 2011.
Ye 2013
Id., "A Sanskrit folio of the Yuktiṣaṣṭikāvṛtti from Tibet."
ARIRIAB 15 (2013) 233-240.
Yonezawa 1998
Yoshiyasu Yonezawa, "Outline of Japanese Arti-
cles." In A Guide to the Facsimile Edition of the Abhi-
samācārika-Dharma of the Mahāsāmghika-Lokottaravādin. Ed.
The Abhisamācārika-Dharma Study Group. Tokyo: The Institute
for Comprehensive Studies of Buddhism, Taishō University,
1998. 27-38.
Yonezawa 2001
Collection
Yonezawa 1999 - Id., "*Lakṣaṇatīkā: A Sanskrit Manuscript of an
Anonymous Commentary on the Prasannapadā.” JIBS 47 (1999)
1024-1022.
Id., Introduction to the Facsimile Edition of a
of Sanskrit Palm-leaf Manuscripts in Tibetan dBu550
med Script. Tokyo: The Institute for Comprehensive Studies of
Buddhism, Taishō University, 2001.
ABBREVIATIONS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Yonezawa 2004
Id., "*Lakṣaṇatīkā Sanskrit Notes on the
Prasannapadā (1)." Journal of the Naritasan Institute for
Buddhist Studies 27 (2004) 115-154.
Yonezawa 2005a — Id., “Prasannapadā 19.3-7 no kaishaku nitsuite (On
Prasannapadā 19.3-7).” Bukkyo-gaku (2005) 55-75.
Yonezawa 2005b
Id., "*Lakṣaṇaṭīkā Sanskrit Notes on the Pra-
sannapadā (2).” Journal of the Naritasan Institute for Buddhist
Studies 28 (2005) 159-179.
Yonezawa 2008 - Id., "Vigrahavyāvartanī. Sanskrit Transliteration and
Tibetan Translation." Journal of the Naritasan Institute for
Buddhist Studies 31 (2008) 209-333.
Yoshimizu 1996
Chizuko Yoshimizu, Die Erkenntnislehre des
Prasangika-Madhyamaka nach dem Tshig gsal stoń thun gyi
tshad ma'i rnam bśad des 'Jam dbyans bźad pa'i rdo rje.
Vienna: ATBS, 1996.
Yoshimizu forthcoming Id., "Reasoning-for-others in Candrakīrti's
Madhyamaka Thought." JIABS (2012).
Yotsuya 1999 - Kodo Yotsuya, The Critique of Svatantra Reasoning by
Candrakīrti and Tsong-kha-pa. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag,
1999.
Zakharyin 2000 - Boris Zakharyin, “Vasubandhu versus Pāṇini on Skr.
pratītya: A Case for Ideology or Linguistics?" Berliner
Indologische Studien 13/14 (2000) 253-264.
Zimmermann 2002 Michael Zimmermann, A Buddha Within: The
Tathāgatagarbhasutra. The Earliest Exposition of the Buddha-
Nature Teaching in India. Tokyo: The International Research
Institute for Advanced Buddhology, Soka University, 2002.Indices
I. Word Index
The index is primarily a Sanskrit word index made on the basis of the
Introduction and the Translation together with its annotation. English entries
usually direct to the corresponding Sanskrit term. A few of the English
entries include terms that were either not (or not sufficiently or consistently)
represented in the Sanskrit cited in the sections indexed or that were more
suitably indexed as such.
For personal names and schools, see the "Traditional Authors/Scholars and
Schools" index.
For works and passages cited/referenced, see the "Index Locorum."
I. = Vol. I
II. = Vol. II
A. = Appendix
abhidhāna, II. n. 32, 41, n. 98, n.
419, n. 593, A. I
abhidheya, II. 10, n. 31, n. 32, 15,
41, n. 98, n. 593, A. I
ābhiprāyika, II. 165
abhivyaktivādin (for abhivyakti,
see manifestation), II. 85
abhyupetabādhā, II. 94, n. 202
activity, see kriyā
adhipatipratyaya, II. n. 552, n.
557, n. 610, n. 612
adhipateyapratyaya, II. 296, n.
551, n. 552, 301, n. 557, n.
558, 335, n. 612
ādityabandhu, II. 163, n. 317
advayadhī, II. n. 34, n. 36
advayajñāna, see jñāna
āgama, I. 11; II. n. 81, n. 202, n.
266, n. 275, n. 300, n. 303, n.
308, 166, n. 321, n. 438, n.
468, 246, n. 479, n. 487, 263,
285, 307, 327
~bādhā, II. 138, n. 275
Candrakīrti's definition of ~,
II. 291, n. 541
canonical Abhidharma works
accepted by Candrakīrti as
II. n. 536
Dignāga rejects ~ as a separate
means of valid cognition, II. n.
502
āhāra (nutriment), II. 157, n. 304
ahetu, II. 39, 48, n. 192, n. 223, n.
204, n. 293, 143, 148, 151, 295552
meaning kuhetu, II. n. 204,
151, n. 298
ākāra, II. n. 383, 215, n. 425, n.
457, n. 474, n. 523, 282, n.
528, n. 555, n. 596, n. 599
ākāśa, II. n. 67, n. 96, n. 102, 88,
n. 191, 106, n. 221, n. 376,
196, n. 388
alayavijñāna, II. n. 282, n. 399
anaikāntikatā, II. 83, n. 179, 128,
n. 256, n. 257
anānārtha, II. n. 44, n. 45, n. 102,
n. 305
anantara(pratyaya), see (sam)a-
nantara(pratyaya)
anavasthā, II. 59, n. 117, n. 120,
n. 457
anekārtha, n. 44, n. 45, n. 102, n.
303, n. 304
animitta, II. 171, n. 331, n. 332,
A. II
anirodha, II. 17, n. 300, n. 302
placed before anutpāda in
MMK mangalaśloka, 47, 48, n.
104, n. 105
aniṣṭhā(dosa) II. n. 117, 57, n.
128, 233
antadvaya, II. n. 15
anu, II. n. 92, 95, n. 204
anubandha, II. n. 31
anuccheda, II. 16, n. 102, 96, n.
303, 188
anumāna (logical inference; type
of valid cognition)
anumānānumeyavyavahāra, II.
104
~bādhā, II. 75, 82, n. 161, 134,
n. 266, A. IX
~s not employed by Nāgārjuna,
II.,
91
~virodha, II. 75, n. 163
INDICES
anyataraprasiddhānumāna, II.
five-membered ~, II. 78, n. 173
paraprasiddhānumāna, I. 8; II.
79ff., n. 173, 84, n. 181, 130ff.,
n. 260, n. 134
134
svārthānumāna, II. 138, n. 276
svata evānumāna, II. n. 148,
70, n. 149, n. 151, n. 258, n.
260, A. IX
svatantrānumāna, I. 7; II. 65,
n. 175
svatantram anumānam, II. 61,
n. 260
three-membered inherent in
Buddhapalita's prasanga, II.
84, n. 181
type of pramāṇa (valid cogni-
tion), II. 224, 282, n. 444, n.
502, n. 541
anumāna defined by Candra-
kīrti, II. 289, n. 541
one of two types of pramāṇa
according to Dignāga, II. n.
444
anyatarasiddha(hetu), II. n. 237,
n. 272
Aparanta, I. 6, 16, n. 37
apatrāpya, II. 157, n. 305
apraṇihita, II. 171, n. 331, n. 332,
A. II
ārambaṇa(pratyaya), II. 296, n.
550, n. 552, 299, n. 555, 300,
n. 557, 325, n. 595, 327, n.
599, 330
aranyetilaka, II. 37, n. 88
arising from self (svataḥ), II. 39f.,
48, n. 109, 50, 51, n. 113, n.
114, n. 120, n. 124, n. 130, n.
136, n. 141, n. 142, n. 151, n.
158, n. 162, n. 163, n. 173, n.
175, n. 176, n. 179, n. 183, n.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
184, n. 185, n. 200, n. 202, n.
203, n. 207, n. 208, n. 209, n.
224, n. 256, n. 257, n. 258,
143, n. 287, n. 297, n. 298, n.
399, 200, n. 402, n. 403, n.
404, 205, n. 414, 210, 295, n.
560, 334
~ not accepted by Madhya-
mikas even from surface point
of view, II. 94
Bhāviveka's anumāna against
~, II. 65, n. 138, 92, n. 199
Bhāviveka's critique of Bu-
ddhapalita's prasanga against
~, II. 54-56, n. 124
Buddhapālita's
prasanga
against ~, II. 53f., n. 117, n.
118, n. 120, n. 160
Candrakīrti's critique of Bha-
viveka's anumāna against ~, II.
91ff.
Candrakīrti's rejection of Bhā-
viveka's critique of Buddha-
palita's prasanga, II. 58ff.
arising from other (parataḥ), II.
48, 50, 51, n. 113, n. 114, 56,
n. 124, n. 133, n. 178, n. 185,
n. 216, 119, 139, 140, n. 282,
142, n. 287, n. 296, 200, 205,
210, 296, n. 549, n. 552, 303,
n. 560, 305, n. 563, 306, n.
565, 334
accepted by Conservative
Buddhists, II. n. 552, 303
accepted by the world (loka),
Conservative Buddhists, Yoga-
cara school, II. n. 282
Bhāviveka's anumānas against
~, II. 199, n. 244
Bhāviveka's critique of Bu-
ddhapalita's prasanga against
~, II. 142ff., n. 287
Buddhapālita's
against ~, II. 142, n. 283
Candrakīrti's
553
prasanga
arguments
against ~, II. 139f., n. 282
Candrakīrti's rejection of Bhā-
viveka's critique of Buddha-
palita's prasanga against ~, II.
145f.
arising from both self and other
(ubhayataḥ), II. 48, n. 109, n.
124
~ accepted by Sankhyas and
Jainas, II. n. 290
Buddhapalita's
prasanga
~, II.
against ~, II. 146, n. 290
Candrakīrti's rejection of ~,
146f., n. 290, n. 292
arising without a cause (ahetu-
taḥ), II. 39, 48, n. 109, 89, 95,
n. 204, n. 282, 143, n. 292,
148, n. 294, 150, n. 295, 200,
202, n. 403, n. 404, 206, 210,
295
accepted by persons who
were previously asaññadevas
and by svabhāvavādins, II. n.
292, n. 294
Bhāviveka's critique of Bu-
ddhapalita's prasanga against
~, II. 150f.
Buddhapālita's
against, II. 150
Candrakīrti's rejection of ~,
148f.
Arjuna, II. n. 13
arthavākya, II. 86, 89, n. 184
arthin (plaintiff), II. 134, n. 268
aśāśvata, II. 16, n. 102, 96, 188,
n. 303
prasanga
II.
asiddhādhāra, II. 101, 103, n.
215, n. 216, n. 224, 112, 113,
129554
asiddha(hetu), II. n. 147, 101, n.
212, n. 237, n. 215, n. 216,
112, 114, n. 237, 116, n. 237,
122, 129, n. 240, n. 260, n.
270, n. 608
aśrayāsiddha, II. 101, n. 212, n.
215, n. 216, n. 224, n. 246, 113
aśubha, II. 178, n. 414, n. 415
aśūnyatāvādin, II. 113
atiprasanga, II. 53, n. 117, A. I
(353)
ātman, II. 17, n. 93, n. 212, n.
216, n. 330, n. 374, n. 436, n.
448, n. 454, n. 471, 246, n.
479, n. 487, 257, n. 517
atmabhava, II. 109, n. 226,
260, 282, n. 572
nirātman/anātman, II. 163, n.
319, 176, n. 450, 178
atthipratyaya, II. n. 558
aupamya, II. n. 541, n. 542
avacyatā, II. 242, n. 471
avidyā, II. 152, n. 299, 200, n.
634
avinābhāva, II.132, n. 263
avīta, II. n. 124
avitathatā, II. 161, n. 313
ayatana, II. n. 65, 65, n. 175, n.
138, 92, 102, n. 214, n. 246, n.
247, n. 252, n. 355, n. 462, n.
511
bādhā, II. n. 202 (see also abhyu-
peta~, āgama~, anumāna~)
bāla, II. n. 348, n. 397, 199
bālalāpinī, II.162, n. 316
bhūmi, II. 4, n. 34, n. 35, 12, 187,
A. II
bodhicitta, II. n. 34, n. 35, 12, 13,
A. II
sambodhicitta, II., n. 34
bodhisattva, II. n. 12, n. 34, n. 37,
n. 103, 238, n. 507, A. II
INDICES
designation only upon
attaining first
bhūmi (vs.
BoBhū view), II. n. 35
buddha, II. 3, n. 42, n. 63, n. 101,
n. 103, 139, n. 278, n. 275, n.
292, n. 300, n. 303, n. 317, n.
327, n. 328, n. 338, n. 376,
195, n. 390, n. 403, n. 419, n.
420, n. 454, 266, n. 505, 267,
n. 508, n. 509, n. 522, n. 544,
n. 552, n. 554, n. 599, n. 612
Buddhahood, II. n. 34, n. 36
II. 8
sam~,
buddhi, II. 251, n. 482, n. 487, n.
514
caitanya, n. 138, 92, n. 181, n.
199, 128, n. 256
cakṣus, 25, 26, 102, n. 224, 112,
n. 244, n. 252, n. 253, n. 261,
n. 516, n. 521, n. 522, n. 523,
n. 567
~ (/darśana) does not see itself,
II. n. 253, n. 264, 130ff., n. 448
paraprasiddhānumāna which
does not see it-
proves that
self, II. 131ff.
cakṣurindriya, II. 24, 25, n. 65,
n. 68, n. 253
made of subtle matter, II. n.
65, n. 80, n. 253
cakṣurvijñāna depends on ~, II.
25, n. 67, n. 68, n. 69, 26
dharma, II. 188, n. 370
prajñā~, II. 122
Caitra, II. n. 565
cause, see hetu
characteristic, see lakṣaṇa
citta, II. n. 216, 246, n. 284, 175,
n. 340, 186, n. 375, 195, 237,
n. 462, 238, n. 463, n. 464,
239, 243, n. 473, n. 476, 246,
n. 479PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
cittacaita, II. n. 61, 43, n. 474, n.
552, n. 555, n. 556, 327, n. 596, n.
597, 330
cittotpada, II. 11, n. 32, n. 35, A.
II
codanā, II. 61, n. 148, n. 151, 82,
n. 176, A. IX
cognition, see jñāna, vijñāna
compassion, see karuṇā
conceptual subjects, II. n. 212
condition, see pratyaya
conditionality, see idampratya-
yatā
contradictory reason, see viru-
ddharthatā
dāṇḍapāśika, II. 88, n. 189
darśana, II. n. 19, n. 145, n. 261,
n. 262, n. 331
~mārga, II. n. 348, n. 370
faculty of vision, II. n. 253, n.
261, n. 264, n. 404, n. 448
does not see itself, see cakṣus
madhyamaka~, II. n. 19, 91, 1
‚ n.
197
dependent-arising, see pratītya-
Samutpāda
dhāraṇīpada, II. 190, n. 376
dharmadhātu, II. n. 303, n. 313, n.
523, A. II, A. X
dharmatā, II. 96, 238, n. 303, n.
313, n. 463, A. X
dhātu, II. n. 23, n. 85, n. 191, n.
253, n. 308, n. 313
kāma~, rūpa~, ārūpya~, II. n.
23, n. 556
555
173, n. 179, n. 233, A. VII, A.
IX
dhvani, II. 253
direct perception, see pratyakṣa
dravya, II. n. 61, n. 191, n. 454, n.
474, n. 484, n. 511, n. 513
dravyasat, II. 103
dṛṣṭānta, II. 54, 58, 68, 70, 78, n.
152, n. 154, n. 155, n. 171, n.
acknowledged by both pro-
ponent and opponent (ubhaya-
siddha, prasiddha), II. n. 138,
n. 167, n. 181, n. 199, n. 216,
n. 251
~ acknowledged only by op-
ponent (paraprasiddha~, svata
eva ~), II. 70, n. 151, 77, n.
167, n. 173, n. 181
long-short ~, II. 38, 39, n. 90,
n. 415
long-short ~ critiqued by
Naiyāyikas, II. n. 91
sādharmya, II. 77, n. 173
ekahetu, II. 39, n. 92
ekārtha, II. n. 102
example, see dṛṣṭānta
extreme, II. n. 15, n. 36, n. 102, n.
403
eye, see cakṣus
gati, II. 14, 173, n. 336, 347
gaur, II. 292, n. 542
gavaya, II. 292, n. 542
gayal, II. n. 542
gnosis, see jñāna
grahaṇakavākya II. 77, n. 166
grammarian, II. n. 51, n. 56, n.
61, n. 113, n. 219, n. 477, n.
568
guna, II. n. 96, n. 199, 106, n.
404, n. 454, n. 484
guṇakriyā, II. 244, n. 475
Gupta (personal name), II. n. 565
hell, see naraka
hetu (logical reason, cause)
acknowledged by both pro-
ponent and opponent (ubha-
yasiddha, prasiddha), II. n.
138, 69, n. 147, n. 194, n. 212,
n. 237, n. 249556
must be accepted by both
parties in a debate, II. n. 147,
n. 237, 136, n. 271, n. 272
Candrakirti's critique of Bhā-
viveka's sattvāt, II. 113, n.
235, 128
Candrakirti's critique of
other~s, II. 199ff.
general/common~, II. 104, n.
216, 106ff.
anityatvasāmānya, II. 113
as cause (see also kāraṇa-
hetu, sahabhūhetu, etc.), II. n.
35, 29, 59, n. 128, 89, 107,
114, 116, n. 239, 148, n. 294,
151, 200, 238, n. 507, n. 519,
296, n. 552, 299, 322, n. 592
~doșa, II. 101, n. 214
~pratyaya, II., 296, n. 552,
299, n. 553, n. 554, 321ff., n.
594
hetvābhāsa, II. n. 143, n. 237,
n. 257, n. 266
logical (see also anaikānti-
katā, asiddha(hetu), etc.), II.
54, n. 121, n. 123, 58, 67, n.
143, 68, n. 147, 70, n. 152, n.
154, n. 155, 77, 78, n. 169, n.
173, 81, n. 185, n. 212, n. 237,
116, n. 240, 119, n. 257, n.
260, n. 266, n. 272, n. 541, 330
paraprasiddha~, II. 134
svaprasiddha~, II. 134
hrī, II. 157, n. 305
idampratyayatā, II. 36, n. 85, 200
idamsatyabhiniveśa, II. 174, n.
338, 177
impermanence, II. n. 404
spontaneous, II. n. 223
inconclusive reason, see anaikān-
tikatā
INDICES
independent inference, see anu-
māna (svatantra~)
inference, see anumāna
īśvara, II. n. 92, n. 102, n. 204,
152, n. 298
jada, II. 287
jīva, II. n. 96, n. 290, n. 330, 195,
n. 387
jñāna, II. 43, n. 98, 159, n. 370, n.
375, n. 415, n. 422, 228, 235,
242, 245, 275
advaya~, II. 12, n. 36, A. II
anāśrava, II. n. 35, 159, A. II
ārya~, II. n. 348
mithyā~, II. 165
vimukti darśana, II. 185
jñeya, II. 43, n. 98, n. 422
kāla, II., n. 92, n. 96, 95, n. 204,
n. 298
kāraka (grammatical) II. n. 447,
n. 472, n. 475, n. 479, n. 490,
262, n. 500, 263, n. 501
~ as agent, II. n. 293, 203, n.
402, n. 404, n. 405
kāraṇahetu, II. n. 552, n. 554, n.
557
karmasādhana, II. 230, n. 452
karunā, II. n. 35, 36, 37, 13, A. II
sattvālambanā ~, dharmālam-
banā~, anālambanā ~, II. n.
37, A. II
kāyagrantha, II. n. 338
klesa, II. n. 26, n. 40, n. 347, 187,
n. 367, n. 370, n. 425
samkleśa, II. 177, n. 347, n.
399
kriyā, II. 246, 307, n. 568, 310, n.
570, 311, n. 572, n. 573, n.
574, 313, 314, n. 577, n. 315,
n. 579, 316, n. 581, n. 582
jani, II. 308, n. 568, 311, n.
572, 317PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
paci~, II. 309, 317, n. 569, 317
utpatti~, II. n. 568
kṛtakārya, II. n. 337, 175
kṛtantavirodha, II. 56
kṣana, II. 284, n. 535
kumārabhūta, II. 4, n. 12
kusala, II. 173, n. 336, n. 343
lakṣaṇa (see also svalakṣaṇa and
sāmānyalakṣaṇa), II. 224ff., n.
446, n. 447, 239ff., 241
linga, II. n. 96, n. 276, n. 383,
289, n. 541
lyap suffix, II. 20, n. 54, 22
lyut suffix, II. 226, n. 447,
Madhyamakāvatāra
interpolated reference to ~, I.
n. 20; II. n. 115, n. 280, n. 493
referred to by Candrakīrti, II.
11, 140, 148, 199, 234, 246,
310, 313, 320
n. 448
Mahābhārata, II. n. 103
mahāmaitrī, II. n. 34
Maitra, II. 306, n. 565
manifestation, II. n. 141, n. 142,
81, n. 175, n. 179, 85, n. 183,
n. 218, n. 219, 107, n. 220, n.
221, n. 256, n. 258
Mañjuśrī, II. 3f., n. 12, 189ff.
Māra, II. 187, n. 367
māyākāra, II. 177
moha, II. n. 331, 184, 195
derivation from √muc, 190, n.
375
moṣadharma(ka), II. 160, n. 312,
161, n. 314, n. 315, 166, n. 325
Mūlamadhyamakakārikā (MMK),
I. n. 3
mangalasloka, I. 7; II. 16f.,
44ff., n. 300, n. 303, n. 304, n.
305, n. 306, n. 436
referred to as Madhyamaka-
śāstra, n. 30, 158
muni, II. 167, n. 327
nānārtha, 18, n. 51, n. 102
557
naraka, II. n. 336, 190ff., n. 375,
n. 378, 196f., n. 390
Nārāyaṇa, II. n. 204, n. 298
nāstika, II. n. 337
natthipratyaya, II. n. 558
neyārtha, II. n. 282, 158, n. 308,
169, n. 334, n. 436
nigamana, II. 78, n. 169, n. 171,
n. 173
nihilist, see năstika
niḥsvabhāvabhāvavādin, II. 87
nimitta, II. 193, n. 331, n. 383, n.
450, n. 476, 266
nirodha, II. 17, n. 48, n. 50, n. 81,
n. 86, 40, n. 96, n. 104, 152, n.
300, 176, n. 340, 300, n. 556,
n. 568, 331, n. 604
sanjñāvedayita samāpatti, II.
186
nirvāṇa, II. n. 45, 17, n. 100, n.
102, 89, n. 204, 114, 160, n.
337, 177, 185, 186, 187, 196,
n. 465, n. 556, 346
niścaya, II. 71, n. 153, 74, 205ff.,
n. 412, n. 413, n. 414, n. 415,
n. 420
nītārtha, II. n. 282, 158, n. 308,
169, n. 334, n. 436
nyāya, II., 71, 91, n. 195, 118,
137, 260
aphorism (“do not criticize one
when both at fault"), II. 129, n.
259
nyāyaśāstra, II. 135, n. 270
reasoning/logic, II. 135
pakṣa (see also subject) II. n. 76,
61, n. 133, n. 133, n. 136, n.
138, 68, n. 146, n. 148, 70, n.
151, n. 152, 74, n. 171, n. 175,
88, n. 211, 143, 146558
pakṣābhāsa, II. n. 202, n. 161,
n. 266
~catuṣṭaya, II. 200, n. 403
~dharma, II. n. 138, 69, n. 147,
n. 212, 107, n. 237
~dharmatā/tva, II. n. 120, n.
153, n. 212, n. 260, n. 272
~doșa, II. n. 123, 103, n. 214,
113
Madhyamika does not have a
~, II. 61, n. 133, n. 134, n. 136
parabhāva, II. 303, n. 560, n.
563, 306
paraloka, II. n. 102, n. 294, 158,
n. 306
paramārtha, II. n. 86, n. 98, 211,
213, n. 224, n. 226, n. 308,
261, n. 537, A. X
paramarthataḥ, II. n. 138, n.
175, 92, 93, n. 200, 102, n.
224, 114, n. 240, n. 244, n.
251, n. 599
paraprasiddhānumāna, see anu-
māna
paryudāsa, II. 51, n. 113, n. 124
paścājjāta(pratyaya), II. 302, n.
558
pradhāna (primordial matter), II.
n. 212, n. 298
pradhānakriya, II. 244, n. 475
prajñā, II. n. 1, 4, 185, n. 317, n.
370, n. 476
prajñāpāramitā, II. 13, n. 102
literature, II. n. 39, n. 42, n.
102, n. 383, n. 594, A. III
meaning of word ~, II. n. 39
prajñāpāramitānīti, II. n. 33, 13,
A. III
prajñapti, II. 255, n. 487, n. 493,
n. 512, n. 513, n. 516
prajñaptisat, II. 103
prakrti
INDICES
Buddhist usage, II. 186, n. 313
non-Buddhist usage, II. n. 96,
n. 142, n. 183, n. 199, 95, n.
204
pramāṇa, II. n. 137, n. 211, n.
404, n. 406, 205ff., n. 409, n.
414, n. 415, n. 420, 221, n.
438, n. 439, n. 441, 223, n.
443, n. 444, n. 445, 255, n.
486, n. 502, 264, n. 503, n.
504, n. 506, n. 519, 281, n.
529, n. 540, n. 541, n. 542, n.
543, n. 544
~dvaya, II. 262
~lakṣaṇa, II. 205, 210, 220f.,
281
~prameyavyavahāra, II. 220, n.
437, n. 439, 260
prapañca, II. 17, 41, 42, n. 97, n.
98, n. 102, 171, n. 383, n. 415,
212, n. 419, n. 420
prāptaphala, II. 33, n. 81, n. 83
prasajyapratiṣedha, II. 50, n. 113
prasanga, I. 7; II. n. 19, 83, n.
120, n. 124, n. 128, n. 148, n.
158, n. 167, n. 169, n. 170, n.
171, n. 173, n. 175, n. 178, n.
183, n. 184, n. 188, n. 202, n.
212, n. 158, n. 260, n. 265, n.
284, n. 287, n. 290, n. 474, n.
512, n. 544, n. 608
~vākya, II. 55, n. 123, n. 130,
n. 284, A. VII
~viparyaya/viparīta, II. n. 124,
61, 86, 143, n. 287
pratijñā, II. 50, 68, n. 148, n. 151,
n. 154, n. 155, n. 157, n. 158,
78, 86, n. 413, A. II, A. IX
Madhyamika does not have a
~, II. 62, n. 139, 86PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
~matra, II. 30, n. 79, n. 138,
73, n. 158, n. 224, n. 260, n.
569, n. 573
svatantrā~, II. 65, 68
pratītyasamutpāda, II. n. 43, n.
45, 17, n. 47, n. 50, 20, n. 56,
22, n. 60, 23, n. 61, n. 62, n.
63, n. 64, n. 69, 27, n. n. 71,
28, n. 72, n. 73, n. 75, 36, 37,
n. 87, 38, 40, n. 92, n. 100, n.
101, n. 102, n. 300, n. 308, n.
403, n. 568, n. 634
eight qualifiers of ~ accepted
by Śrāvakas, II. n. 102, n. 303
etymology of ~, II. 18ff.
Bhāviveka's
etymological
comments on ~, II. 27, n. 71,
29f., 36f.
Candrakīrti's critique of
Bhāviveka's
etymological
comments on ~, II. 26ff., n. 73,
29ff., n. 80
Candrakīrti's preferred ety-
mology of ~, II. 18ff., n. 53, n.
56
expressed as the formula asmin
satīdam bhavati, II. 36f., n. 86,
n. 87, n. 90, 335, n. 611, n. 612
main aim of the Buddha's
teaching is ~, II. 43
avoids extremes, II. n. 15, n.
102, n. 403
~
is ruined/distorted by Mā-
dhyamikas, II. n. 63, n. 300
qualifiers of~, II. n. 44, 17f.,
40, n. 102
not arisen by
subject matter (abhidheya) of
MMK is ~, II. 17
surface-level
own-nature, II. 40
tathāgata is undifferentiated
from nature of ~, II. 16, n. 43
559
Tibetan translation of ~, II. n.
52, n. 56, n. 71
twelve-linked ~, II. n. 62, n.
93, n. 102, n. 299, n. 300, n.
403, n. 634, A. X
who sees
sees the Dhar-
ma/Tathāgata, II. 23, n. 63
wrongly translated as interde-
pendence, II. n. 61, n. 404
pratyakṣa, I. 8, 9; II. 63, n. 137, n.
202, n. 211, 112, n. 266, n.
438, n. 444, 264ff., n. 506,
268ff., n. 509, n. 513, n. 514, n.
522, n. 526, n. 528, n. 529, n.
531, n. 534, n. 535, n. 536, n.
537, n. 539, n. 540, n. 543
defined by Candrakīrti,
287f., n. 540, n. 541
etymology of ~
II.
according to Candrakirti, II.
273ff., n. 515, n. 516
according to Dignāga, II.
276f., n. 518
Candrakīrti's refutation of
Dignāga's etymology, II.
277ff., n. 519ff.
kalpanapodha, II. 285, n. 504
pratyaya (see also adhipatipra-
tyaya, adhipateyapratyaya, ā-
rambana(pratyaya), atthipra-
tyaya, hetu (~pratyaya), natthi-
pratyaya, (sam)anantara(pra-
tyaya), I. 11; II. 3, n. 56, n.
102, 116, 119, n. 244, n. 279,
n. 282, n. 293, 152, n. 310,
200, n. 447, n. 463, n. 552,
296, n. 555, n. 556, n. 557, n.
558, n. 559, n. 560, n. 561, n.
562, n. 564, n. 568, 309, 310,
n. 570, n. 573, n. 575, n. 576,
n. 577, n. 578, 318, n. 583, n.
587, n. 588, n. 592, n. 604,560
336, n. 613, n. 615, n. 616, n.
618, n. 619, 340, 342, n. 623,
n. 625, n. 627, 344, n. 628, n.
631
hetu samāgrī, II. 29
pratyarthin (defendant), II. 134,
n. 268
pratyekabuddha, II. n. 103.
prayogamārga, II. 84, n. 348
prayogavākya, II. n. 194, 91
svatantra, II. 92
prayojana, II. 10, n. 31, n. 32, 15,
n. 45, n. 166, A. I
prayojanaprayojana, II. n. 31, A.
I
pudgala, II. n. 96, n. 292, n. 308,
n. 330, 171, 172, 190, n. 374,
195, n. 387, n. 422, n. 471
exists as a component of
worldly vyavahāra, II. 255, n.
488
purojāta(pratyaya), II. 302, n.
558
purușa, II. n. 98, 190, n. 374, n.
383, 195, n. 387, n. 476
Sāṁkhya usage, II. n. 96, n.
142, 84, n. 181, n. 199, n. 204,
n. 298
Rāhu, II. 250, n. 480, n. 481, 253,
n. 483, n. 483, 256, n. 488,
257, n. 492
Rāmāyaṇa, II. n. 13, n. 103
Ratnagupta monastery, I. 15, n.
33; II. n. 71
reason, see hetu
rūḍhisabda, II. 37, n. 88
rūpa, II. n. 66, 26, 257
matter, II. n. 61, n. 191, 89, n.
192, n. 454, n. 480, n. 512
bodily material / body, II. n.
98, 162, 257
INDICES
secondary matter, II. n. 65, n.
450
visible form, II. 25, n. 67, n.
69, 26, 124, n. 252, 125, n.
521, n. 522, 280, n. 523, n. 555
colour, II. n. 430
sabda
equivalent to agama, II. n. 483,
n. 486, n. 541
Mīmāmsaka and Vaiseṣika
theories of (sound), II. n.
218, n. 219, n. 220, n. 221
~ employed as general subject,
II. 104 ff.
~sāmānya, II. 113
sabhāga II. 124, n. 252
~hetu, II. n. 552, n. 554
sādhana, II. n. 32, n. 120, n. 124,
68, n. 157, 114, n. 237, 119,
123, 136, n. 272, 143, n. 286,
144, n. 287, n. 296, n. 516, n.
541
sādhanadharma, II. n. 138, 77
sādhya, II. n. 32, 56, n. 124, n.
138, n. 143, 78, n. 173, n. 211,
n. 240, n. 256, n. 263, n. 287,
143, n. 296, n. 431, n. 541
sādhyadharma, II. 77, 107, 109,
n. 211, n. 226
sādhyasama, II. n. 212, 128, n.
257, 218
sahabhūhetu, II. n. 552, n. 554, n.
558
sahajata(pratyaya), II. 302, n.
558
sākṣin (legal witness), II. 134, n.
268
sakti, II. 81, n. 183, 88, n. 221, n.
472, n. 575, 320, n. 589
samādhi, II. n. 292, 185, n. 419,
n. 476PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
(sam)anantara(pratyaya), II. 296,
n. 552, 300, n. 556, 331, 332,
n. 608
Samantabhadra, II. n. 35
sāmānya (general nature of
elements of inference), see
subject (general/common sub-
ject); see also hetu
sāmānyalakṣaṇa, II. n. 92, 224, n.
444, n. 450, 232, 263, 287, n.
539
sambandha, II. 10, n. 31, 11, n.
32, A. I
,
samjñā, II. 163, 186, n. 376, n.
379, 194, 198, 215, n. 476, n.
536
samjñāvedayitanirodhasamāpatti,
II. 186, n. 364
samprayuktahetu, II. n. 552, n.
554
samsāra, II. n. 21, n. 32, n. 92, n.
104, n. 105, n. 128, n. 306,
167, n. 326, n. 327, n. 329, n.
336, n. 337, 174, 175, 177,
185, 188, 199, n. 404, n. 509
samskāra, II. n. 221, n. 236, 152,
n. 299, 154, n. 301, 160, n.
311, n. 312, 163, n. 318, n.
319, 166, n. 325, 299, n. 507
samvṛti, I. 9; II. n. 207, n. 226,
112, 113, 114, n. 237, 200, n.
402, n. 422, n. 442, n. 454, n.
469, n. 479, 258, n. 491, n. n.
495, n. 498, n. 502, n. 514, n.
599
561
acknowledged in one's own ~s,
II. n. 202
Dignāga's ~, II. n. 406, 220, n.
407
loka~, II. 257
~satya, II. n. 86, n. 402
sapakṣa, II. n. 256, n. 257
sarvatragahetu, II. n. 552, n. 554
śāstra, II. n. 30, n. 33, 14, see also
Mūlamadhyamakakārikā
etymology of~, II. 14, n. 40
pointlessness of the Madhya-
mikas' ~, II. 207, n. 436
sasvabhāvabhāvavādin, II. 87
sasvabhāvavāda, II. 200
śāśvata, II. n. 15, n. 50, n. 96, n.
102, n. 206
savakāśavacana, II. n. 123, 87, n.
187, n. 294, 150
self-cognition/self-awareness, see
svasamvitti, svasamvedana
Śeșa, II. n. 13
siddhantavirodha, II. 87, n. 185
Siddhārtha, II. n. 103
siddhasādhana, II. n. 123, 66, n.
141, 67, n. 144, 81, n. 175, n.
185
silaputraka, II. 248, n. 480
silence, II. n. 338, 211, 212, n.
419
siva, II. 17, 43, 163, 345, n. 45, n.
100, n. 319, n. 331
skandha, II. n. 35, n. 292, n. 301,
n. 308, n. 318, n. 362, 187, n.
403, n. 405, n. 422, n. 447, n.
450, n. 462, n. 471, n. 474,
255, n. 487, n. 488, n. 492
dharma, II. n. 594
lokottara, II. n. 362
~māra, II. n. 367
smrtyupasthāna, II. 238, n. 465
śrāvaka, II. n. 34, n. 102, n. 103,
187, n. 387, n. 545
subject (see also pakṣa), II. 120,
n. 143, n. 147, n. 148, n. 151,
n. 169, n. 171, n. 173, n. 175,
n. 179, n. 200, n. 211, n. 212,
n. 213, n. 214, n. 215, n. 258562
general/common~, II. 104ff.,
n. 216, n. 224, n. 226
general/common ~ proposed
by Bhāviveka, II. 104ff., n. 246
rejection of general/common
~ by Candrakīrti, II. 109ff., n.
226
sabdasāmānya, II. 113
~ (must be) accepted by both
proponent and opponent, II. n.
147, n. 148, n. 194, n. 237
śūnyatā, II. n. 37, n. 313, 171, n.
331, n. 332, n. 375, n. 436, A.
II
sunyatādṛsti, II. n. 19
Sunyatāvādin, II. 113
svabhāva
as nature of things (non-
Buddhist), II. 95, n. 204, n.
294, n. 295, n. 298
svabhāvavādin, II. n. 294
svalakṣaṇa, I. 8; II. 224ff., n. 444,
n. 445, 228, n. 449, n. 450,
230, n. 453, n. 454, 232, n.
455, n. 456, n. 460, 238, n.
466, n. 469, n. 499, n. 500, n.
502, n. 511, n. 539
svasāmānyalakṣaṇa, II. n. 92, n.
224, n. 444
svasamvitti, II. 233ff., n. 457, n.
459, n. 460
svasamvedana, II. n. 457, n. 461,
n. 479
svatantrānumāna, see anumāna
svatantraprayogavākya, II. 92
tarka, II. 9, n. 27
Tarkajvālā
deviates from MHK, II. n. 253,
n. 254
tarkalakṣaṇa, II. 138, n. 277
tarkaśāstra, II. 92
INDICES
tārkika, II. 9, n. 27, 91, n. 196,
114, 201, n. 403, 220, 222, n.
441, n. 506
tathāgata, II. 13, 15, n. 41, 16, n.
85, n. 63, n, 85, 46, n. 102,
114, n. 237, 116, n. 240, n.
303, n. 313, n. 329, 177, n.
347, n. 362, 187, 188, 189,
195, n. 403, 215, 307, n. 590,
n. 592
etymology of ~, II. n. 42
referred to as paramaguru,
II. 16
"whether ~S arise or not"
citation, II. n. 303, A. X
tathatā, II. n. 42, 161, n. 313, n.
465, 238
tatsabhāga, II. 124, n. 252
tattva, II. n. 102, n. 208, n. 277, n.
308, n. 310, 160, 165, 200,
241, n. 471, 258, n. 491, 260
principles, II. n. 204
tattvavid, II. 271, n. 514
thesis, see pratijñā
timira, II. 111, n. 228, 112, 159,
160, n. 348, n. 422, 215, 218,
n. 521, 288, n. 540, n. 544, n.
558, A. X
tīrthika, II. n. 102, 98, 254
tuṣṇībhāva, II. 211, n. 419
ubhaya(pra)siddha, II. 69, n. 147,
n. 148, n. 151, 138, A. IX
uccheda, II. 17, n. 96, n. 145, 96,
n. 292
unestablished reason, see asi-
ddha(hetu)
upacāra, II. n. 253, 267ff., n. 506,
n. 509
upādāna, II. n. 448, n. 479, 256,
n. 487, n. 512, n. 513, 265, 268
upadrava, II. n. 100, 345
Upagupta, II. 306, n. 565PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
upālambha, II. 61, n. 134, n. 137
upamāna, II. n. 438, n. 486, n.
502, n. 541, 292, n. 542
upanaya, II. 78, n. 169, n. 171, n.
173
upapatti, II. n. 114, 59, n. 129, 71,
74, 139, n. 278, n. 406, 211,
212, n. 420, 258, n. 491, 261,
n. 497, A. XI
Nobles teach by way of
known to ordinary people, II.
216
upasarga, II.18f., n. 53, A. V
utpāda (svataḥ, parataḥ, etc.), see
arising from self, arising from
other, etc.
vadatām varam, II. 50, n. 103
Vajrasattva, II. 3
valid cognition, see pramāṇa
vedanā, II. n. 98, n. 292, n. 304,
162, n. 317, 228, n. 450, n.
474, n. 476, n. 478
vihāra, II. n. 354, n. 357
vijñāna, II. 25f., 30, 32, n. 69, n.
102, n. 199, n. 299, 163, 228,
230, 243, n. 474, 245, n. 476,
n. 521, n. 522, 280, n. 525, n.
536, n. 552, n. 555
characteristics of according
to AK and AKBh, II. 228, n.
450, n. 454, n. 473, n. 474
mano~, II. 280, n. 523, n. 536,
n. 537, n. 557
stops when ultimate realized,
II. n. 100, n. 415
vikalpa, II. n. 98, n. 376, n. 397,
n. 502, n. 518, n. 523, n. 528,
n. 536
vimokṣamukha, II. 171, n. 331, n.
332
vināśa, II. n. 48, 22, 27, 107, n.
223
vipākahetu, II. n. 552, n. 554
vipakşa, II. n. 256, n. 257
viparyāsa, II. 110, n. 226, n. 227,
n. 233, 176, n. 342, n. 376,
194, n. 386, 195, n. 402, n.
403, 215, 260, n. 495
viruddharthatā, II. n. 123, 66, 67,
n. 143, n. 144, 82, n. 175, n.
185, 116, n. 608, A. VIII
vişamahetu, II. 39, n. 92
visual faculty, see cakṣus (cakṣur-
indriya)
vīta, II. n. 124
vivādāṁga, II. 43, n. 96
vivaraṇavākya II. 77, n. 166
viveka(tā), II. 238, II. n. 464
vyavahāra, II. n. 35, n. 56, n. 98,
43, n. 147, 121, n. 247, 135, n.
273, n. 399, n. 432, n. 469, n.
479, 246, n. 488, n. 504, 269,
n. 537, n. 541, n. 566
anumānānumeya~, II. 104
jñānajñeya, II. 43
laukika, II. 256
loka(sam), II. 213, n. 422,
269
563
pramāṇaprameya~, II. 220, n.
437, n. 439, 260
Yama, II. 192, n. 337
yantrayuvati/yantraputrikā II.
179, n. 346
yukti, II. 30, 166, n. 321, 258, 307
II. Traditional
authors/scholars and
schools
Abhayākaragupta, I. 6564
Āryadeva, II. n. 39, n. 40, 61, n.
490, n. 574
Avalokitavrata, I. 4, n. 18; II. n.
39, n. 40, n. 42, n. 50, n. 56, n.
69, n. 71, n. 78, n. 79, n. 82, n.
98, n. 123, n. 181, n. 199, n.
216, n. 236, n. 237, n. 240, n.
243, n. 247, n. 249, n. 257, n.
283, n. 286, n. 287, n. 294, n.
295, n. 298, n. 546, n. 558, n.
568, n. 569, n. 581, n. 592, n.
593, n. 599, n. 608, n. 612, A.
I, A. III, A. VII
date of ~, II. n. 79
lists MMK commentators, II.
n. 118
Bhāviveka, I. 7; II. n. 27, n. 40, n.
50, n. 56, n. 69, 27, n. 71, n.
72, n. 73, 29, n. 75, n. 79, 32,
n. 80, 33, n. 82, n. 83, 36, 37,
n. 87, 39, n. 98, n. 101, n. 102,
n. 103, n. 104, n. 111, n. 113,
n. 118, n. 119, n. 123, n. 130,
61, 65, n. 138, n. 142, n. 148,
n. 153, n. 158, 75, n. 162, n.
167, 81, 82, n. 175, 83, n. 178,
n. 179, n. 183, n. 185, n. 191,
89, 91, n. 194, 93, n. 200, n.
202, n. 203, n. 207, n. 209,
100, n. 210, n. 211, 102, n.
212, n. 213, n. 214, n. 215,
104, n. 224, 109, n. 226, 113,
n. 235, 114, n. 236, n. 237,
118, n. 240, n. 241, 119, n.
244, 120, n. 246, 122, n. 247,
n. 248, 123, 124, n. 251, n.
252, n. 253, 128, n. 254, n.
256, 129, n. 257, 142, n. 283,
n. 286, n. 287, n. 288, n. 290,
n. 294, 150, 151, n. 295, n.
296, n. 297, n. 298, n. 303, n.
336, n. 406, n. 436, n. 474, n.
INDICES
545, n. 552, n. 554, n. 555, n.
556, n. 557, n. 558, n. 560, n.
561, n. 563, n. 568, n. 569, n.
573, n. 577, n. 579, n. 581, n.
582, n. 584, n. 585, n. 589, n.
590, n. 591, n. 592, n. 593, n.
594, n. 595, n. 596, n. 599, n.
603, n. 605, n. 607, n. 608,
609, n. 612, n. 613, n. 614, n.
617, n. 621, n. 632, n. 633, A.
I, A. III, A. IV, A. VI, A. VII,
A. VIII., A. IX, A. XI
n.
referred to by Candrakīrti as
a tārkika, II. 91, 114
name, I. n. 4
identified by *LT's author, II.
n. 131, n. 196, n. 248, n. 250
identified as proponent of
independent proofs (svatantra-
sādhanavādin), II. n. 125
Blo gros brtan pa, II. n. 51
Buddhapālita, I. 7; II. n. 96, n.
104, n. 105, 53, 54, n. 118, n.
122, n. 124, n. 58, n. 129, n.
158, 68, 76, 77, 79, 81, 83, 86,
87, n. 191, 90, n. 257, 142, n.
283, 144, n. 286, n. 287, n.
288, n. 290, n. 293, 150, n.
295, 151, n. 547, n. 552, n.
554, n. 557, n. 560, n. 561, n.
565, n. 569, n. 573, n. 577, n.
579, n. 581, n. 582, n. 585, n.
589, n. 592, n. 593, n. 594, n.
595, n. 599, n. 601, n. 602, n.
605, n. 607, n. 608, n. 609, n.
612, n. 613, n. 614, n. 617, n.
621, n. 622, n. 630, n. 633, A.
I, A. VII, A. VIII
identified by *LT's author, II.
n. 71
Candragomin, II. n. 56PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
565
414, n. 415, n. 418, n. 419, n.
420, n. 422, n. 427, n. 432, n.
436, n. 438, n. 441, n. 442, n.
443, n. 445, n. 446, n. 447, n.
448, n. 450, n. 453, n. 454, n.
457, n. 459, n. 460, n. 464, n.
466, n. 469, n. 471, n. 473, n.
475, n. 476, n. 479, n. 480, n.
481, n. 483, n. 487, n. 490, n.
492, n. 494, n. 495, n. 497, n.
498, n. 499, n. 502, n. 504, n.
506, n. 507, n. 509, n. 511, n.
512, n. 513, n. 514, n. 515, n.
519, n. 522, n. 523, n. 528, n.
530, n. 531, n. 534, 535, n.
536, n. 537, n. 539, n. 540, n.
541, n. 543, n. 547, n. 549, n.
553, n. 554, n. 555, n. 556, n.
557, n. 560, n. 564, n. 565, n.
568, n. 569, n. 570, n. 572, n.
573, n. 574, n. 575, n. 577, n.
579, n. 582, n. 584, n. 589, n.
592, n. 594, n. 596, n. 599, n.
601, n. 603, n. 605, n. 607, n.
608, n. 609, n. 612, n. 614, n.
616, n. 621, n. 622, n. 626, n.
627, n. 628, n. 629, n. 630, n.
632, 347
date, I. n. 1
Candrakīrtipāda, II. n. 317
Devaśarman, I. n. 23; II. n. 118,
n. 552, n. 593
Candrakīrti (references merely
clarifying the main text [e.g.,
"Candrakīrti is citing"] are not
included), II. 1, 2, 3, n. 15, n.
19, n. 27, n. 30, n. 32, n. 33, n.
35, n. 36, n. 39, n. 40, n. 42, n.
48, n. 50, n. 51, n. 52, n. 53, n.
56, n. 61, n. 68, n. 69, n. 72, n.
76, n. 79, n. 80, n. 81, n. 82, n.
83, n. 84, n. 85, n. 86, n. 90, n.
92, n. 97, n. 98, n. 100, n. 101,
n. 102, n. 104, n. 105, n. 109,
n. 111, n. 113, n. 114, n. 115,
n. 116, n. 117, n. 118, n. 123,
n. 124,
125, n. 130, n. 134,
n. 136, n. 138, n. 140, n. 147,
n. 148, n. 151, n. 153, n. 158,
n. 164, n. 165, n. 169, n. 170,
n. 171, n. 173, n. 175, n. 178,
n. 179, n. 183, 86, n. 184, n.
185, n. 188, n. 191, n. 194, n.
198, n. 199, n. 200, n. 202, n.
203, n. 204, n. 205, n. 206, n.
207, n. 208, n. 211, n. 212, n.
215, n. 216, n. 223, n. 226, n.
227, n. 231, n. 235, n. 239, n.
247, n. 251, n. 258, n. 259, n.
260, n. 263, n. 264, n. 265, n.
267, n. 269, n. 270, n. 271, n.
275, n. 278, n. 280, n. 282, n.
284, n. 286, n. 287, n. 288, n.
290, n. 293, n. 294, n. 295,
151, n. 298, n. 299, n. 301, n.
302, n. 303, n. 306, n. 308, n.
310, n. 312, n. 313, n. 314, n.
317, n. 319, n. 325, n. 327, n.
329, n. 330, n. 331, n. 334, n.
336, n. 337, n. 338, n. 340, n.
344, n. 345, n. 346, n. 347, n.
348, n. 349, n. 350, n. 362, n.
367, n. 375, n. 389, n. 399, n.
402, n. 403, n. 404, n. 406, n.
Dharmaguptaka, II. n. 552
Dharmakīrti, II. n. 124, n. 212, n.
276, n. 437, n. 444
Dharmapāla, I. n. 1
Dharmottara, II. A. I
Dignāga, I. 7; II. n. 120, n. 124, n.
147, n. 153, n. 181, n. 202, n.
211, n. 212, n. 216, n. 237, n.
247, 136, n. 270, n. 271, n.
272, n. 274, n. 276, n. 406, n.566
414, n. 436, 220, n. 437, n.
438, n. 441, n. 442, n. 443, n.
444, n. 445, n. 447, n. 449,
229, n. 453, n. 454, n. 455, n.
457, n. 460, n. 466, n. 469,
242, n. 476, n. 480, n. 481, n.
483, 254, n. 484, n. 486, n.
488, 257, n. 492, n. 494, n.
495, n. 497, n. 498, n. 499, n.
500, n. 501, n. 502, 265, n.
504, n. 506, n. 509, 269, n.
511, n. 513, n. 514, n. 517,
276, n. 518, n. 519, 277, n.
521, n. 522, n. 523, n. 526, n.
528, 282, n. 530, n. 531, n.
532, n. 534, n. 535, n. 536, n.
537, n. 539, n. 540, n. 543
Gunamati, I. n. 23; II. n. 118, n.
568, n. 573
Guṇaprabha, II. n. 40
Gunaśrī, I. n. 23; II. n. 118
Jaina, II. n. 96, n. 218, n. 290, n.
484
'Jam dbyangs bzhad pa, I. 27f.; II.
n. 179, n. 226
Jayānanda, I. n. 8
Jinendrabuddhi, I. n. 5, II. n. 124,
n. 504, n. 506, n. 518, n. 522,
n. 536
Jñānagarbha, II. n. 44, n. 71, n.
117, n. 124, n. 324, n. 327, n.
577, n. 581, n. 592, n. 595, n.
605, n. 613, n. 616, n. 619, n.
625, A. IV
'Jug stobs can, II. n. 294
Kamalaśīla, I. 4
Kanakavarman, I. 16, II. n. 592
Klu'i rgyal mtshan, II. n. 44, n.
71, n. 117, n. 124, n. 324, n.
327, n. 577, n. 581, n. 592, n.
595, n. 605, n. 613, n. 616, n.
619, n. 625, A. IV
INDICES
Kumārajīva, II. n. 39, n. 328, n.
592, n. 595
Kumārila, II. n. 32, 352f., A. I
Lokāyata, II. n. 294
Madhyamika, II. n. 63, n. 91, n.
93, n. 102, n. 130, 61, n. 133,
n. 133, n. 136, n. 137, 65, 66,
67, n. 141, 68, n. 148, n. 149,
n. 151, 73, n. 158, 74, 75, n.
162, n. 163, n. 175, n. 181, n.
183, 88, n. 197, n. 199, n. 202,
94, n. 203, n. 207, 98, n. 216,
n. 226, n. 216, 131, n. 261,
134, n. 269, n. 271, n. 300, n.
303, n. 308, n. 319, n. 337, n.
338, n. 389, n. 402, n. 406, n.
407, n. 409, n. 410, n. 414, n.
416, n. 417, n. 443, n. 451, n.
453, n. 479, n. 593, n. 628, n.
629,
~ does not have a pakṣa / prati-
jñā, II. 61, n. 133, 62, n. 136
does not state independent
inferences, II. 65, 68
must state inferences ac-
knowledged by the opponent,
II. 68ff.
Maharṣi 'Jig rten mig, II. n. 294
Mahāsumati, I. 15, n. 34; II. n.
263, n. 480, n. 592, n. 616
Matrceta, II. n. 544
Mīmāmsaka, II. 106, n. 219, 107,
n. 220, n. 221, n. 223, n. 484,
n. 486
Nāgārjuna, I. 1, 2, 7, 11, 13, 14,
20; II. 2, 3, 7, n. 30, n. 32, n.
35, n. 36, 13, 15, 33, n. 83, n.
86, 38, n. 102, 46, 47, 48, n.
109, n. 113, n. 118, n. 136, 87,
88, n. 191, 89, n. 194, 91, n.
200, 97, 99, n. 209, 112, 116,
n. 240, n. 251, n. 263, 139, n.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
287, n. 290, 147, n. 292, 148,
n. 293, n. 299, 158, 165, n.
325, n. 327, 173, n. 338, n.
399, 201, n. 403, n. 414, n.
436, n. 443, 225, n. 446, 241,
n. 490, n. 558, n. 560, 313,
314, 316, 317, n. 584, 319,
325, n. 593, 327, 331, n. 605,
332, n. 607, 334, n. 611, n.
612, 336, n. 621
meaning of name ~, II. n. 13
prediction of ~'s attainment of
first bhūmi, II. n. 35
Naiyāyika, II. n. 91, n. 216, n.
218, n. 275, 204, n. 406, n.
407, n. 414, n. 418, n. 436, n.
438, n. 442, n. 484, n. 486, n.
541
Pa tshab, II. 3, n. 44, n. 71, n. 84,
n. 155, n. 162, n. 184, n. 263,
n. 277, n. 282, n. 324, n. 330,
n. 480, n. 488, n. 502, n. 507,
n. 509, n. 514, n. 515, n. 544,
n. 570, n. 575, n. 577, n. 592,
n. 595, n. 600, n. 605, n. 616
copied in citations, II. n. 124,
n. 330
Pārthasārathimiśra, A. I
Prajñākaragupta, II. 37, A. XI
Prajñākaramati, I. 5, n. 11; II. n.
98, n. 102, A. I
567
199, n. 200, 98, n. 207, n. 211,
n. 212, n. 215, n. 216, n. 237,
n. 242, n. 248, 128, n. 256, n.
257, n. 258, n. 290, n. 438, n.
484, A. VIII, A. IX
Śäntaraksita, I. 4
Śāntideva, I. 5
Sarvāstivādin, II. n. 191, n. 223,
n. 282, m. 346, n. 399, n. 480,
n. 505, n. 536, n. 541, n. 552,
n. 556, n. 558, n. 568, n. 596,
n. 457
Sautrāntika, II. n. 48, n. 56, n.
191, n. 236, n. 282, n. 480, n.
511, n. 536, n. 545, n. 568, n.
569, n. 582 n. 585, n. 589
bSod nams Sen ge, II. n. 179
śrāvaka, II. n. 34, n. 102, n. 103,
187
Śrīlāta, II. n. 61
Sthiramati, II. n. 79, n. 118, n.
244
Ratnākaraśānti, I. 5
Ratnavajra, I. n. 15
Sammatīya, II. n. 191, n. 223, n.
292
Sankhya, II. n. 96, 55, n. 124, 58,
n. 130, 65, 66, n. 141, n. 142,
67, 68, n. 151, 71, 73, n. 160,
n. 158, 75, n. 162, n. 163, 76,
n. 172, n. 173, 81, 82, n. 175,
n. 176, n. 177, n. 179, 84, n.
181, 85, n. 183, 86, n. 185, n.
Tsong kha pa, II. 4, n. 124, n.
218, n. 225, n. 227, n. 261, n.
277, A. VII
Uddyotakara, II. n. 91, n. 212, n.
406, n. 410, n. 518, n. 541, A.
XI
Vaibhāṣika, II. n. 96, n. 236, n.
536, n. 545, n. 552, n. 556, n.
558, n. 569
Vaiseșika, II. n. 96, n. 204, 106,
107, n. 218, n. 219, n. 220, n.
221, n. 232, n. 438, n. 484, n.
486, n. 511
Vasubandhu, II. n. 56, n. 69, n.
86, n. 438, n. 476, n. 521, n.
522, n. 537
Vasumitra, II. n. 596
Vātsīputrīya, II. n. 191, n. 223, n.
292568
Vātsyāyana, II. n. 91, n. 406, n.
430, A. XI
Yaśomitra, II. n. 56, n. 61, n. 69,
n. 505, n. 522, n. 536, n. 537
Yogācāra, I. 8; II. n. 98, n. 223, n.
252, n. 282, n. 308, n. 399, n.
406, n. 436, n. 437, n. 443, n.
457, n. 459, n. 479, n. 511
III. Index Locorum
Abhidharmakośa
AK 1.9cd. II. n. 65
AK I. 12. II. n. 511
AK I. 12d. II. n. 450
AK I.14cd • II. n. 450
AK I.28ab. II. n. 191
AK 1.35ab II. n. 65
AK I.45ab. II. n. 521, n. 522
AK I.45cd. II. n. 522
AK I.45 • II. n. 521
AK II.22. II. n. 217, n. 254, n.
511
AK II. 23ab. II. n. 23
AK II.24. II. n. 476
AK II.32. II. n. 305
AK II.34bc. II. n. 555, n. 596
AK II.34cd. II. n. 474
AK II.49 II. n. 552
AK II.50b-d • II. n. 552
AK II.53cd. II. n. 552
AK II.54ab. II. n. 552
AK II.54cd • II. n. 552
AK II.61cd. II. n. 594
AK II.61c. II. n. 552
AK II.61d II. n. 552, n. 554
AK II.62 • II. n. 594
AK II.62ab. II. n. 556
AK II.62c. II. n. 555
INDICES
AK II.62d II. n. 557
AK II. 65 • II. n. 511
AK III.4ab. II. n. 336
AK III.21b. II. n. 299
AK V.12. II. n. 552
Abhidharmakośabhāṣya
AKBhed 3.23. II. n. 191
AKBhed 6.2-3 • II. n. 65
AKBhed 7.12f. • II. n. 505
AKBhed 7.13-14 • II. n. 505
●
●
AKBhed 8.13 • II. n. 450
AKBhed 8.19 II. n. 450
AKBhed 10.17-18 • II. n. 476
AKBhed 11.7. II. n. 450
AKBhed 18.11-17 • II. n. 191
AKBhed 22.20-22. II. n. 536
AKBhed 27.6-12. II. n. 216
AKBhed 28.2-4. II. n. 252
AKBhed 28.4-5 • II. n. 252
AKBhed 28.22-24 • II. n. 252
AKBhed 33.17-19. II. n. 65
AKBhed 34.20-22. II. n. 521
AKBhed 34.27-30 • II. n. 522
AKBhed 36.24-25 • II. n. 523
AKBhed 54.20-21. II. n. 476
AKBhed 62.5-6. II. n. 555
AKBhed 62.9. II. n. 474
AKBhed 80.1-3. II. n. 480
AKBhed 80.15. II. n. 302
AKBhed 80.22-23 • II. n. 236
AKBhed 83.8-9 • II. n. 552
AKBhed 92.5-6 • II. n. 191
AKBhed 98.5-6. II. n. 552
AKBhed 98.7. II. n. 552
AKBhed 98.8. II. n. 552
AKBhed 98.10-11. II. n. 556
AKBhed 98.12-17 . II. n. 556
AKBhed 100.4-6 • II. n. 555
AKBhed 100.14-16 • II. n. 557
AKBhd 108.11-12. II. n. 450
AKBhd 108.23 • II. n. 81
edPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
●
ed
AKBhed 108.25 • II. n. 236
AKBhed 114.7. II. n. 336
AKBhed 136.2 • II. n. 62
AKBhed 137.18 • II. A. X
AKBhd 138.1-3. II. n. 56
AKBhed 138.4-7 • II. n. 56
AKBhed 138.13-15. II. n. 56
AKBhed 138.14-15 • II. n. 568
AKBhed 138.15-17 • II. n. 568
AKBhed 138.16-17 • II. n. 56
AKBhed 138.17-18. II. n. 87
AKBhed 138.24-27 • II. n. 61
AKBhed 138.27-28. II. n. 69
AKBhed 138.28-139.24 • II. n. 86
AKBhed 141.8-9. II. n. 298
AKBhed 143.20-23 • II. n. 505
AKBhed 144.2-4 • II. n. 536
AKBhed 144.3-4. II. n. 536
AKBhed 152.8-154.26 • II. n. 304
AKBhed 153.8-9. II. n. 304
AKBhed 193.5-10. II. n. 223
AKBhed 193.7-8. II. n. 48
AKBh IX • II. n. 292
Abhidharmakośavyākhyā
AKVY 32.33-33.2. II. n. 450
AKVy 38.23ff. • II. n. 450, n. 474
AKVY 57.13-14 • II. n. 191
AKVY 64.22-23 • II. n. 536
AKVy 66.31-33 • II. n. 253
AKVy 77.2-12 • II. n. 252
AKVy 87.2-17 • II. n. 521
AKVY 87.24-26 • II. n. 522
AKVY 123.20-28 • II. n. 217
AKVy 127.24-25 • II. n. 476
AKVY 190.27-28 • II. n. 552
AKVY 232.18 • II. n. 556
AKVY 236.8 II. n. 557
AKVY 293.20-22 • II. n. 63
AKVY 294.21-24 • II. n. 56
AKVY 296.22-33 • II. n. 61
AKVY 296.33-297.4 • II. n. 69
AKVY 298.26-27 • II. n. 62
Abhidharmahrdaya
• II. n. 552
*Abhidharmamahāvibhāṣaśāstra
• II. n. 191
Abhidharmasamuccaya
•. II. n. 92
• II. n. 516
Abhidharmasamuccayabhāṣya
ASBh 78.6 II. n. 370
ASBh 152.27-30 II. n. 516
Abhisamayalankārālokā
• II. A. I
569
Akṣayamatisūtra
• II. n. 308, 169, n. 330, 331, n.
332, n. 333
Akutobhayā
ABhed 240.8-242.9 • II. n. 104
ABhed 242.9ff. • II. n. 102
ABhed 251.10-22 • II. n. 111
ABhed 253.10-19. II. n. 560
ABhed 253.20 • II. n. 552
ABhed 254.10-11 • II. n. 552
ABhed 254.11-12. II. n. 555
ABhed 254.12-13. II. n. 556
ABhed 254.13-14 • II. n. 557
ABhed 255.20 • II. n. 583
ABhed 257.8-10 • II. n. 592
ABhed 257.20-22. II. n. 594
ABhed 358.13 II. n. 327
ABhed 431.16-17 • II. n. 98
ABhed 438.13-14 • II. n. 98
Anguttaranikaya
AN I.51.19-21. II. n. 305570
AN I.83 II. n. 305
AN I.95
II. n. 305
●
Ardhatṛtīyasāhasrī
• II. n. 35
*Āryadharmasamgītisūtra
• II. n. 98
●
Āryasatyadvayāvatārasūtra
• II. n. 98
Aṣṭādhyāyī
Pā 1.1.58 II. n. 452
Pā 1.4.49 • II. n. 101
Pā 2.1.44• II. n. 88
Pā 2.1.51. II. n. 452
Pā 2.3.37• II. n. 564
Pa 3.3.113 II. n. 447
●
Pa 3.3.115. II. n. 447
Pa 3.3.117. II. n. 447
Pa 3.4.21 II. n. 56
Pa 4.4.98 II. n. 59
Pā 5.4.124. II. n. 325
Pā 7.1.37• II. n. 54
Aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā
Aṣṭa 6.17 II. n. 102
Asta 135.11-15. II. n. 102
Aṣṭa 229.22-26. II. n. 17
Asta 235.14-15. II. n. 102
Aṣṭa 253.26-28 • II. n. 102
Bhavasamkrāntisūtra
• II. n. 399
●
Bodhicāryāvatārapañjikā
BCAP 5.11-12 • II. A. I
BCAP 98.7 II. n. 216
BCAP 297.9 • II. n. 471
BCAP 354.13-15 • II. n. 102
BCAP 363.1-2 • II. n. 312
INDICES
BCAP 392.10-393.5 • II. n. 461
BCAP 421.5-7 • II. n. 102
BCAP 474.15-18. II. n. 405
BCAP 483.16-17 • II. n. 216
BCAP 484.3. II. n. 216
Bodhisattvabhūmi
BhoBhū 12f. • II. n. 35
●
BhoBhū 272.12ff. • II. n. 376
Buddhacarita
6.42 II. n. 103
●
9.58-62 II. n. 204
Buddhapalita Madhyamakavṛtti
BPed 2.16-20 II. A. I (355)
BP 4.23-5.2. II. n. 96
ed
BP 5.19 II. n. 96
ed
●
ed
BP 5.20 II. n. 96
BPed 6.2-9.13 II. n. 104
BPed 6.17-9.3. II. n. 105
BPed 9.11-12. II. n. 104
BP 10.11-17 • II. n. 117
ed
BPed 10.13-14 • II. n. 117
BPed 10.14-15 • II. n. 166
BP 10.18-19. II. n. 283
ed
BP 10.21-23. II. n. 295
ed
11.3-7. II. n. 547
BP 11.14-16. II. n. 552
ed
11.16-18 II. n. 552
BP
ed
BP
BP ed
●
12.7-15 II. n. 565
●
BP
ed
13.7-11 II. n. 562
BPed 13.21-14.8 • II. n. 569
BPed 14.15-15.5 • II. n. 573
BPad 15.13-14. II. n. 579
ed
BP ed
●
15.17-16.2 II. n. 579
16.7-10 • II. n. 581
BP
ed
ed
BP
BP
ed
ed
BP ed
BP
BP
ed
ed
●
16.13-16. II. n. 582
17.5-7. II. n. 585
17.7-15 II. n. 585
18.7-8 II. n. 589
18.9-17. II. n. 589
●BPed 19.9-11. II. n. 590
●
BPed 20.14 II. n. 592
20.20-24 • II. n. 594
BP
BP 20.22-23. II. n. 598
ed
BPed 21.2-6• II. n. 599
BP 21.12-13. II. n. 601
ed
ed
BP 21.13 II. n. 594
ed
BP 21.15-19. II. n. 599
ed
BPed 21.23-22.5 II. n. 599, n.
601
BPed 21.24. II. n. 594
BP
ed
BP
ed
ed
●
BPed 23.4-10 II. n. 608
BPed 23.11-13. II. n. 608
BPed 23.14-18. II. n. 608
BP
24.5-18. II. n. 607
BP 25.6-10. II. n. 612
ed
22.13-16 • II. n. 605
22.16-20 • II. n. 609
ed
ed
BP 26.14-19. II. n. 614
BPed 28.6-8 II. n. 621
28.8-11 • II. n. 621
●
BP
●
BP 29.3-5 II. n. 626
ed
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
BP 29.7-13. II. n. 630
ed
BP 60.10-12. II. n. 295
ed
BP 64.7-14 II. n. 257
●
ed
BP 159.18. II. n. 327
ed
Candrakalā
• II. A. V
Carakasamhitā
Cikitsasthāna 1.57.2 • II. n. 480
III.8.39 II. n. 516
Catuhśataka
CŚ XIII.1. II. n. 514
CŚ XIII.2. II. n. 514
CŚT XIII.5cd • II. n. 257
CŚ XIII.16 • II. n. 264
CŚ XIV.13 II. 341, n. 622
CŚ XIV.15 II. 270, n. 512
CŚ XV.14 • II. n. 574
CŚ XV.16 • II. n. 574
CŚ XV.17 • II. n. 573
CŚ XV.18-24 • II. n. 574
CŚ XV.19. II. n. 568
CŚ XV.23. II. n. 574
CŚ XVI.25 • II. n. 134
Catuhśatakatīkā
CSTed 128.3-5. II. n. 92
CST 164.8-9 II. n. 312
●
ed
ed
CST
CST 164.13 II. n. 327
164.13-15 • II. n. 42
CST 164.17-18 • II. n. 42
CST 167.1-5. II. n. 42
ed
ed
●
ed
●
ed
CSTed 228.14-18. II. n. 128
CŚTed 228.16 II. n. 117
CST 265.5-8. II. n. 308
CST 280f. II. n. 264
CSTed 292.10-12• II. n. 523
CŚTed 332-340 II. n. 622
CŚTed 340.11-13 • II. n. 512
CSTed 364.2-3. II. n. 568
CŚTed 366.1-2. II. n. 568
CŚTed 366.12-13 • II. n. 568
CŚTed 368.1-2. II. n. 574
CŚTed 368.11-12 • II. n. 568
CŚTed 368.13-14 • II.
n. 572
CŚTTed 60.16-17 • II. n. 514
CSTTed 62.8-16. II. n. 513
CŚTTed 63.5-10 II. n. 513
CŚTTed 63.21-64.1 • II. n. 506
CŚTTea 64.1-4 • II. n. 506
CŚTTed 64.10 II. n. 504
CSTTed 64.15-18. II. n. 535
CŚTTed 64-65 II. n. 228
●
ed
571
CŚTTed 66.5-9. II. n. 535
CŚTTed 67.4-7. II. n. 513
CŚTTed 67.7-9 II. n. 513
CŚTr 67.10-17 • II. n. 540
CŚȚ D 32a7-32b1 / P 34b6-7 • II.
n. 40
Ted572
CST D 58b4-5 / P 175a2-3 • II. n.
117
CŚT D 61b7-62a1 • II. n. 317
CŚT D 131b1ff. • II. n. 346
CŚT P 62a1-2. II. n. 319
CST P 258a8-258b3 • II. n. 574
Chung Lun
• II. n. 552, n. 560
Daśabhūmikasūtra
43.9-10 II. A. X
Dhammapada
35cd II. n. 216
●
160 II. n. 216
●
Dhammasanganī
DS 201, 202. II. n. 338
Dhātupāṭha
2.36-38 II. n. 51
●
Dīghanikāya
DN 1.28-29. II. n. 292
DN II.157.8-9. II. n. 302
DN II. 199.6-7. II. n. 302
DN III.137. II. n. 109
DN III.230 II. n. 338
Dīghanikāya-atthakathā
DN-attha I.237 • II. n. 370
Dṛdhādhyāśayaparipṛcchāsūtra
• II. 177, n. 345
Itivuttaka
Iti 91 II. n. 63
Jñanaprasthāna
• II. n. 552
INDICES
Kāśikā
Kāś ad Pā 1.4.49 • II. n. 101
●
Kāś ad Pā 2.1.44 • II. n. 88
Kāś ad Pa 2.3.37• II. n. 564
Kāś ad Pā 3.3.113 • II. n. 447
Kāś ad Pa 3.3.115. II. n. 447
Kāś ad Pā 3.3.117 • II. n. 447
Kāś ad Pā 3.4.21 • II. n. 56
Kāś ad Pā 4.4.98 • II. n. 59
Kāśyapaparivartasūtra
KPed § 102. II. n. 340
KPed § 138.3-5. II. n. 349
KPed § 139.2-4 • II. n. 349
KPd § 141.3-149.5 • II. n. 349
ed
Khandhavaggatīkā
• II. n. 92
Lalitavistara
176.11-12 II. n. 205
Lokātītastava
11. II. n. 469
21. II. n. 403
Madhyamakahṛdayakārikā
MHK 1.6 II. n. 34
MHK I.19 II. n. 336
MHK II.7b. II. n. 40
MHK III.26. II. n. 224
MHK III.27. II. 127, n. 254
MHK III.40 • II. n. 253
MHK III.41ab. II. n. 253
MHK III.139. II. n. 207
MHK III.192. II. n. 290
MHK III.215-223 • II. n. 298
MHK V.7. II. A. III
●
Madhyamakaratnapradīpa
P 335b1-2 II. n. 317
●Madhyamakaśāstrastuti
v. 4 & 10. II. n. 20
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Madhyamakāvatāra
MA I.1. II. n. 36
MA I.2. A. II
MA I.3. A. II
MA I.4a A. II
MA I.4cd-5 II. n. 35, A. II
●
MA I.9a. A. II
MA VI.8 II. n. 116
●
MA VI.8cd. II. 52, 311, n. 571
MA VI.12. II. n. 208
MA VI.14. II. n. 282
MA VI.17. II. n. 564, n. 565
MA VI.18 II. n. 564
MA VI.19. II. n. 564
MA VI.19d. II. n. 572
MA VI.24. II. n. 422
MA VI.28 II. n. 402
MA VI.31. II. n. 208
MA VI.36 II. n. 399
MA VI.57c. II. 313, n. 575
MA VI.57. II. n. 575
MA VI.58ab. II. n. 589
MA VI.68cd • II. 320, n. 479
MA VI.72-76 • II. n. 459, n. 479
MA VI.97. II. n. 308
MA VI.98 II. n. 290
MA VI.99. II. n. 282, n. 295
MA VI.137. II. n. 479, n. 487
MA VI.159a-c • II. n. 479
MA VI.173 II. n. 136
MA VI.208cd-209 • II. n. 331
MA VI.222. II. A. X
Madhyamakāvatārabhaṣya
MABhed 6.11-13. II. n. 36
MABhed 6.13-7.6. A. II
MABhed 7.8, 7.10-13, 7.14-16ff. •
II. n. 36
MABhed 8.5-10. A. II
573
MABhed 8.10-12. II. n. 36
MABhed 9.4-11.14 • A. II
MABhd 11.15. A. II
ed
●
ed
MABhed 12.1-8 • A. II
MABhd 12.15-13.1. A. II
MABhed 22.3-5. II. n. 317
MABhed 22.13-14 • II. n. 329
MABhed 30.11-17 • II. n. 39
MABhed 76.13-16 • II. n. 35
MABhed 81.7-8 II. n. 109
MABhd 81.9-15. II. n. 111
MABhed 81.15-17 • II. n. 113
MABhed 86.1-2, 9-10 • II. n. 208
MABhed 86.11-15. II. n. 209
MABhed 87.15-89.2 • II. n. 282
MABhed 87.19-88.3 • II. n. 549
MABhed 88.5-6 • II. n. 555
MABhed 88.7-9 • II. n. 556
MABhed 88.9. II. n. 557
MABhed 88.10-12. II. n. 554
MABhed 88.12-15. II. n. 555
MABhed 88.15-17 • II. n. 556
MABhed 88.17-18 • II. n. 557
MABhed 88.20-89.2 • II. n. 559
MABhed 88.19-20 • II. n. 558
MABhed 89.6-7, 15, 19-20 • II. n.
282
MABhed 90.4-8 • II. n. 282
MABhed 92.16-93.3 • II. n. 565
MABhed 93.9-13. II. n. 564
MABhed 96.1-3 • II. n. 572
MABhed 101.3ff. • II. n. 282
MABhed 102.18-103.1 • II. n. 226
MABhed 109.6-110.11 • II. n. 228
MABhed 113. II. n. 208
●
MABhed 115.12-13 • II. n. 205
MABhed 115.17-19 • II. n. 205
MABhed 116.18-117.2 II. n. 206
MABhed 119.14-120.4 • II. n. 402
MABhed 119.17-19 • II. n. 312
MABhed 120.15-17 • II. n. 402574
MABhed 122.7ff.
399
MABhed 127.17-128.13 II. n.
399
●
II. n. 282, n.
●
MABhed 148.7-17. II. n. 575
MABhed 148.18-149.7• II. n. 589
MABhed 149.11-18 • II. n. 589
MABhed 150.9-10. II. n. 90
MABhed 165.9-12. II. n. 317
MABhed 166.61 • II. n. 459
MABhed 167.11-18 • II. n. 457
MABhed 167.18-168.11
457
• II. n.
MABhed 168.11-18 • II. n. 457
MABhed 175.17 • II. n. 336
MABhed 181.11-202.4 • II. n. 308
MABhed 199.13-16. II. n. 308
MABhed 199.17-20. II. n. 308
MABhed 200.7-10 • II. n. 334
MABhed 202.6ff. • II. n. 282
MABhed 202.8-9. II. n. 290
MABhed 202.10-18 • II. n. 290
MABhed 203.2-12. II. n. 290
MABhed 204.8-11 • II. n. 282
MABhed 205.2. II. n. 291
MABhed 205.3-6 • II. n. 291
MABhed 206.3-4. II. n. 295
MABh 206.12-19 • II. n. 295
MABhed 214.20-215.5. II. n. 298
MABhed 216.16-18 • II. n. 228
MABhed
224.9-11. II. n. 512
MABhed 226.1-4 • II. n. 404
MABhed 226.14-15 • II. n. 404
MABhed 226.16-18 II. n. 86, n.
405
MABhed 227.1-4. II. n. 90
MABhed 227.14-18 • II. n. 404
MABhed 228.5-11. II. n. 85
●
MABhed 228.12-15 II. n. 84
MABhed 229.8-12. II. n. 102
MABhed 231.7. II. n. 30
MABhed 245.4 • II. n. 216
INDICES
MABhed 257.2. II. n. 216
MABhed 257.7 • II. n. 216
MABhed 260.12-13 • II. n. 479
MABhed 260.12-261.14
• II. n.
447
MABhed 260.18-19 • II. n. 479
MABhed 261.9 • II. n. 447
MABhed 261.12-14 • II. n. 487
MABhed 261.20-262.4 • II. n. 479
MABhed 262.4-6. II. n. 487
MABhed 278.9-18 • II. n. 479
MABhed 297.9-12 • II. n. 134
MABhed 306.1-3. II. A. X
MABhed 306.4-8 • II. A. X
MABhed 306.18-19 • II. A. X
MABhed 319.7-8 • II. n. 331
MABhed 319.9-13 • II. n. 331
MABhed 339.18-340.1 • II. A. X
Madhyāntavibhāga
MAV 1.8 II. n. 474
●
Madhyāntavibhāgabhāṣya
MAVBh 20.19-20 • II. n. 474
Madhyāntavibhāgabhāṣyatīkā
MAVT 3.6-9. II. n. 40
MAVT 3.19-20 • II. n. 53
MAVT 30.2 II. n. 474
MAVT 31.15-17. II. n. 474
MAVT 31.16-17 • II. n. 474
MAVT 45.8 II. n. 474
Mahābhāṣya
ad Pā 1.1.58 • II. n. 452
ad Pā 2.1.51 • II. n. 452
II.i.55 II. n. 542
Mahāyānasūtrālankāra
158.20-22 II. n. 405
MajjhimanikāyaMN I.8 II. n. 102
●
MN I.57.13-20 • II. n. 426
MN I.111.35-36 • II. n. 67
MN I.161.33-34 • II. n. 419
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
MN I.190.37-191.2 • II. n. 63
MN 1.228. II. n. 478
MN I.230 II. n. 478
MN I.261.5-12. II. n. 304
MN I.262-263. II. n. 86
MN I.484f., 498f. • II. n. 338
MN II.32. II. n. 86
MN III.63 II. n. 86
●
MN III.245.16-21 • II. n. 312
Majjhimanikāya-atthakathā
MN-attha III.269-270 • II. n. 81
MN-attha IV.39 • II. n. 81
MN-attha IV.56. II. n. 314
Mīmāmsāsūtra
MS I.1.6-23
Mūlamadhyamakakārikā
MMK I.1. II. n. 29, 48, n. 108, n.
109
MMK I.2. II. n. 545, n. 547, 296,
n. 549, n. 552
MMK I.3ab • II. 139, n. 279, n.
563
MMK I.3. II. 303, n. 560
●
MMK I.4 II. 310ff., n. 570ff.
MMK 1.5 II. 317f., n. 583, n.
584
MMK I.6. II. 319, n. 587, n. 588
MMK I.7. II. 116, n. 238, n. 239,
322, n. 592
MMK 1.8 II. 325f., n. 595, n.
599, 329f., 601, 602
MMK 1.9. II. 331, n. 604, n. 605,
n. 607, n. 608, 334, n. 609
MMK I.10 II. 335, n. 611, 612
●
575
MMK I.11 II. 336f., n. 613, n.
614
MMK 1.12. II. 338, n. 615, n.
616, n. 617, n. 627
MMK I.13 II. 340, n. 619. n.
620, n. 621
MMK I.14 II. 342, n. 623, n.
624, n. 625, n. 626, 344, n.
631, n. 632
MMK II.1. II. n. 247, n. 251
MMK II.18-20. II. n. 102
●
MMK II.21 II. n. 102, n. 470
MMK III.2. II. n. 252, n. 263,
n. 264
MMK IV.2. II. n. 192
MMK V.1. II. 88, n. 191
MMK V.2. II. n. 446
MMK V.3. II. n. 446
MMK V.4. II. n. 446
MMK V.6ab. II. n. 36
MMK VI.4. II. n. 102
MMK VI.5. II. n. 102
MMK VIII.3-4. II. n. 293
MMK VIII.12 • II. n. 402, n. 404,
n. 490
MMK VIII.13 • II. n. 479
MMK XI.3. II. n. 104 & n. 105
MMK XII.9ab • II. n. 292, 203
MMK XIII.1 II. n. 311, n. 312,
n. 313, n. 344, n. 325
MMK XIII.2. II. 166, n. 325
MMK XV.2. II. n. 313
MMK XV.5. II. n. 36
MMK XV.7• II. 169, n. 329
MMK XV.10-11 • II. n. 102
MMK XVII.13-20 • II. n. 399
MMK XVIII.1 • II. n. 216
MMK XVIII.5. II. n. 98
MMK XVIII.9. II. n. 98
MMK XVIII. 10. II. n.
206
MMK XVIII.11 • II. n. 102
MMK XX.3 • II. n. 562576
MMK XX. 19cd • II. n. 282
MMK XX.20cd • II. n. 282
MMK XX.24ab • II. n. 577, n.
626
MMK XXI.10 • II. n. 102
MMK XXI. 13. II. n. 109
MMK XXII.11 • II. n. 423
MMK XXIII.10. II. n. 415
MMK XXIII.11 • II. n. 415
MMK XXV.4 • II. n. 193
MMK XXV.5cd. II. n. 111
MMK XXV.16 • II. n. 415
MMK XXVI.1 • II. n. 299
Mūlapaṇṇāsaṭīkā
• II. n. 92
Nāradasmrti
(The Plaint) • II. v. 32
(The Plaint) II. v. 43
Nyāyabhāsya
NBh 12.4-6 • II. n. 541
NBh 13.11-12. II. n. 541
NBh 14.4-5 • II. n. 541
NBh 97.12-14. II. n. 541
NBh 236 II. A. XI (378)
NBh 238 II. A. XI (378)
NBh 238.5-7. II. n. 91
NBh 238.10-13. II. n. 91
NBh 272.16-273.3 • II. n. 430, A.
XI (380)
NBh 274.1-5. II. n. 430
Nyāyabinduṭīkā
• II. n. 518, A. I
Nyāyamañjarī
• II. A. I
Nyāyamukha
NM 2 II. n. 147, n. 272
INDICES
NM 4. II. n. 143
NM 4d. II. n. 169
NM ad 15ab. II. n. 522
NM 9. II. n. 143
NM13ab II. n. 153
●
NM 15a II. n. 504
Nyāyapraveśa
141 II. n. 257
• II. n. 518
Nyāyasūtra
NS I.1.5. II. n. 541
NS I.1.6. II. n. 541
NS I.1.7 II. n. 541
NS I.1.8 II. n. 541
NS I.2.8 II. n. 257
NS II.1.13 II. A. XI (378)
NS II.1.14 II. A. XI (378)
●
NS IV.1.37. II. A. XI (378)
NS IV.1.39 • II. n. 91, A. XI
(378)
NS IV.1.40• II. n. 91, n. 406, A.
XI (378)
NS IV.2.27 • II. n. 406, A. XI
(379)
NS IV.2.29 II. A. XI (377)
●
NS IV.2.30 II. n. 406, A. XI
(379)
NS IV.2.31 II. n. 430
●
NS IV.2.33 II. n. 430
●
Nyāyavārttika
NV 26.15-18. II. n. 518
NV 26.21-27.1 • II. n. 541
NV 57.6-8 II. n. 541
NV 453.10-12. II. n. 91
NV 454.6-8
(379)
NV 487.17-488.1 II. n. 406, A.
XI (379)
• II. n. 91, A. XIPrakaraṇa
T Vol. 26, 715c26 II. 327, n.
596
Pancaskandhaka
• II. n. 476
Pancaskandhaprakaraṇa
• II. n. 317, n. 319
Pañcatantra
I.389 II. n. 308
●
Paramārthaśūnyatāsūtra
●
› II. n. 86, n. 405, n. 479
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Patthāna
• II. n. 552, n. 558
Prajñāpradipa
PPed 476.1-6 II. n. 194
PP D 45b6-7 / P 53b7-8• II. A.
III
PP D 46a1-6; P 54a1-54b2 • II. A.
I (354)
PP D 46b2-3 / P 54b6-8 • II. n. 71
PP D 46b3-4 / P 54b8-55al • II.
n. 69, n. 77, A. VI
PP D 46b4/P 55a1-2 • II. n. 87
PP D 46b4-7 / P 55a2-6 • II. n. 56
PP D 46b7-47a2 / P 55a6-55b1 •
II. n. 56
PP D 47a2-3 / P 55b2-3 • II. A.
IV (360)
PP D 47a4-5 / P 55b5-6 • II. n. 50
PP D 47a7/P 56a2 • II. n. 101
PP D 47a7-48a1 / P 56a2-3 • II. n.
98
PP D 47b2/P 56a4-5 • II. n. 103
PP D 48a1-2 / P 56b6-8 • II. n.
104
PP D 48a5 / P 57b5 • II. n. 102
577
P 75a6-7 II. n.
PP D 48a5-6
303
PP D 48a5-7 / P 57a5-57b1 • II. n.
102
PP D 48b1-3 / P 57b3-6 • II. n.
108
PP D 48b5-6 / P 58a1-2
138
PP D 48b6-49a2 / P 58a3-58b1 •
II. n. 113
PP D 49a2-3 / P 58b1-2
138, n. 199
PP D 49a3-5 / P 58b3-5
142
●
●
II. n.
II. n.
• II. n.
PP D 49a4/P 58b4-5 • II. n. 175
PP D 49a5 / P 58b5-6 • II. n. 175
PP D 49a5-7 / P 59a7-8 • II. n.
117
PP D 49a6-7 / P 58b8-59a1 • II.
A. VII
PP D 49a6-49b1 / P 58b8-59a2 •
II. n. 124
PP D 49b1/P 59a2-3 • II. n. 183
PP D 49b1-2 / P 59a3-4 • II. n.
183
PP D 49b2/P 59a4-5 • II. n. 183
PP D 49b4/P 59a7-8 • II. n. 216
PP D 49b4-5 / P 59a7-59b1 • II.
n. 244
PP D 49b7-50a1 / P 59b5-6 • II.
n. 216
PP D 50a4-5 / P 60a3-4 • II. n.
216
●
PP D 50a5/P 60a4-5 • II. n. 246
PP D 50a5-6 / P 60a5-6 II. n.
383
PP D 50a6/P 60a6-8 • II. n. 124
PP D 50a6-7/P 60a6-60b1 • II. n.
204
PP D 50a7/P 60b1 • II. n. 178, n.
287578
PP D 50b1-2 / P 60b2-3 • II. n.
290
PP D 50b3/P 60b5-6 • II. n. 290
PP D 50b3-4 / P 60b6-7 • II. n.
290
PP D 50b7/P 61a4 • II. n. 298
PP D 50b7-51a1 / P 61a4-5 • II. n.
204
PP D 51a7-52b5 / P 61b7-62a7 •
II. n. 298
PP D 52b3-4 / P 63b1 • II. n. 216
PP D 52b6/P 63b4 • II. n. 204
PP D 52b7-53a5 / P 63b6-64a4 •
II. n. 183
PP D 53a5/P 64a5 • II. n. 295
PP D 53a5-6 / P 64a5-7 • II. n.
124
PP D 53a7-53b1 / P 64a8-64b1 •
II. n. 111
PP D 53b2/P 64b2-3 • II. n. 552
PP D 53b3/P 64b3-4 • II. n. 558
PP D 53b3-4 / P 64b4-5 • II. n.
554
PP D 53b4/P 64b5 • II. n. 555, n.
556, n. 557
PP D 54a3-4 / P 65a5-6 • II. n.
563
PP D 54a4-5 / P 65a7-65b1 • II. n.
563
PP D 55a3-5 / P 66a8-66b2 • II. n.
569
PP D 55a7-55b3 / P 66b5-8 • II.
n. 573
PP D 55b5-6 / P 67a3-4 II. n.
573
PP D 55b6-7 / P 67a5-6
568
PP D 56b2-3 / P 67b1-2
579
II. n.
• II. n.
PP D 56b4-5 / P 68a6-7 • II. n.
582
INDICES
PP D 56b5-6 / P 68a7 • II. n. 568,
n. 582
PP D 56b7/P 68b1 • II. n. 584
PP D 57a1/P 68b2-3 • II. n. 584
PP D 57a2-3 / P 68b4-5 • II. n.
585
PP D 57b2-4; P 69a5-8 • II. n.
589
PP D 57b7-58a4; P 69b3-8 • II. n.
589
PP D 58b1/P 70a5 • II. n. 592
PP D 58b3-4 / P 70a7-70b1 . II.
n. 236
PP D 58b3-5; P 70a7-70b3 • II. n.
590
PP D 58b4/P 70b1 • II. n. 554
PP D 58b6-59a1 / P 70b3-6 • II.
n. 241
PP D 58b7/P 70b5-6 • II. n. 592
PP D 59a1; P 71a8 • II. n. 603
PP D 59a1-4/P 70b6-71a2 • II. n.
593
PP D 59a5 / P 71a4 • II. n. 593
PP D 59a6/P 71a5. II. n. 599
PP D 59b1-2; P 71a8-71b1 • II. n.
599
PP D 59b5 / P 71b5-6 • II. n. 596
PP D 59b7-60a3; P 71b8-72a4 •
II. n. 594
PP D 60a4/P 72a4-6 • II. n. 607
PP D 60a5-7 / P 72a6-8 • II. n.
608
PP D 60a7/P 72a8-72b1 • II. n.
609
PP D 60b5/P 72b7-8 • II. n. 124
PP D 61a1-2 / P 73a3-4 • II. n.
612
PP D 61b1/P 73b4 • II. n. 613
PP D 61b1-2 / P 73b5 • II. n. 614
PP D 61b4-5 / P 73b8-74a1 • II.
n. 617
PP D 62a1/P 74a5 • II. n. 621PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
PP D 62a6-62b1 / P 74b4-6 • II.
n. 632
PP D 63a3/P 76a3-4 • II. n. 251
PP D 63a4-5 / P 75b4-5 • II. n.
247
PP D 63a6-64b1 / P 75b7-8 • II.
n. 249
PP D 63b1 / P 75b1-76a1 • II. n.
249
PP D 63b2/P 76a2-3 • II. n. 251
PP D 76b3-4 / P 92a5-6 • II. n.
253
PP D 76b7-77a1 / P 92b3• II. n.
252
PP D 180a1-2 / P 223b7-224a2 •
II. n. 194
PP D 180b2-5 / P 224b4-8 • II. n.
216
PP P 237b3• II. n. 98
Prajñāpradīpatīkā
PPT D 6b4-7 / P 7b5-8a2 II. A.
III
PPT D 8b1-3 / P 9b8-10a3 • II. n.
40
PPT D 8b6; P 10a7 • II. A. I (355)
PPT D 28b5/P 34a2 • II. n. 71
PPT D 29a3/P 34a8 • II. n. 71
PPT D 29a4/P 34b1 • II. n. 71
PPT D 29b1-6/P 34a6-35a6 II. n.
79
PPT D 29b1/P 34b7 • II. n. 78
PPT D 29b5 / P 35a4 • II. n. 78
PPT D 33b6-34a7/P 39b5-40a8 •
II. n. 56
PPT D 41b6-42a4 / P 48a8-48b6 ·
II. n. 50
PPT D 43b6-44a2 / P 50b2-6 • II.
n. 56
PPT D 44a3-4 / P 50b8 • II. n. 98
PPT D 54b5-55a3 / P 63a1-7 • II.
n. 102
579
PPT D 55a3-4 / P 63a7
102
PPT P 63b6-7 • II. n. 195
PPT D 68a4-5 / P 79a4-5 • II. n.
182
PPT D 73a4-6 / P 85a7-85b1 • II.
n. 117 • II. n. 182
PPT D 73b3-4 / P 85b8-86a1 • II.
A. VII (365)
PPT D 74a2-3 / P 86a7-86b1 • II.
A. VII (366)
PPT D 75b4-7 / P 88b2-6• II. n.
183
PPT D 76b7-77a3 / P 90a1-6 • II.
n. 183
PPT D 82b1-3 / P 96b2-5 • II. n.
243
• II. n.
PPT D 83a5-83b / P 97a8-97b6 •
II. n. 243
PPT D 84b1-2 / P 98b8-99a2 • II.
n. 244
PPT D 84b2-3 / P 99a2-3 • II. n.
244
PPT D 84b3/P 99a3 • II. n. 244
PPT D 88a2-89b4 / P 103a1-
105a1 II. n. 244
●
PPT D 102a1 / P 119b7 II. n.
283
PPT D 103a1-2 / P 120b1-2 • II.
n. 287
PPT D 103a3-5/P 110b7-111a2.
II. n. 287
PPT D 103b2-3 / P 111a6-8 • II.
n. 287
PPT D 103b3 / P 111a7-8 • II. n.
286
PPT D 103b4-5/P 111a8-111b2.
II. n. 286
PPT D 114a5 / P 132a8
204
PPT D 153b1 / P 176b7 • II. n.
295
• II. n.580
PPT D 156b1-2 / P 180a5-6 • II.
n. 545
PPT D 171b1-6/P 198b8-199a8 •
II. n. 573
PPT D 183b7-185a3 • II. n. 589
PPT D 191b5-6 / P 223a2 • II. n.
236
PPT D 192b1-2 / P 224b6-7 • II.
n. 237
PPT D 192b2-7/P 224b7-225a7.
II. n. 240
PPT D 192b5 / P 225a4-5 • II. n.
592
PPT D 195a1l-195b1 / P 227a1-
227b2 II. n. 593
PPT D 195b4-6 / P 227b6-8 • II.
n. 599
PPT D 219b4-6 / P 256a4-7 • II.
n. 247
PPT D 221a2-7 / P 257b6-258a5.
II. n. 249
Prakaraṇapāda
• II. n. 552
●
Pramāṇasamuccaya
PS I.1. II. n. 444
PS I.2ab₁ • II. n. 529
PS I.2b₂c₁• II. n. 529
PS I.2cd II. n. 444
PS I.2cd-3b • II. n. 444
PS I.3c II. n. 504, n. 526
PS I.3d. II. n. 444
PS I.4ab. II. n. 519
PS I.6ab. II. n. 523
PS I.9a II. n. 457
●
PS I. 12ab. II. n. 457
PS I.41cd II. n. 506
PS II.1ab. II. n. 276
PS II.5cd II. n. 211
PS III.2 II. n. 211
PS III.11 II. n. 147
●
●
INDICES
PS III. 12. II. n. 272
PS III. 12bc• II. n. 237
PS III. 15d. II. n. 169
PS III.16 II. n. 124, n. 212
●
●
PS III.17 II. n. 120, n. 212
PS III.27. II. n. 143
PS IV.6ab II. n. 153
Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā
PST ad PS I.1 • II. A. XI
PST ad PS 1.3c • II. n. 518, n. 522
PST ad PS I.4ab • II. n. 522
Pramāṇasamuccayavṛtti
PSV ad PS I.1. II. A. XI
PSV ad PS I.2ab₁ • II. n. 529
PSV ad PS I.4ab II. n. 519, n.
●
522, n. 536
PSV ad PS I.4cd • II. n. 511
PSV ad PS I.6ab • II. n. 523
PSV ad PS 1.9a II. n. 457
●
PSV ad PS I.41cd • II. n. 506
PSV P 127b8 • II. n. 272
K
PSVK P 127b8-128a1 • II. n. 272
PSVK P 128a1-2 • II. n. 212
Pramāṇavārttika
PV III.54cd • II. n. 444
Pramāņavārttikabhāṣya
PVBh 647.9. II. n. 147
Pramāṇavarttikālankāra
3.18 II. A. XI (377)
Pramāņavārttikasvavṛtti
PVSV 153. II. n. 272
Prasādapratibhodbhava
37. II. n. 543
PrasannapadāPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
(the numerous references to PSPL
chapter one are not noted)
PSP₁ 92.3-5. II. n. 102
L
PSP₁ 101.14. II. n. 90
PSPL 108.8-9 II. n. 205
PSP₁ 113.7-8 II. n. 261
PSP₁ 114.1 II. n. 448
PSP₁ 135.10 II. n. 15
●
●
PSP₁ 137.5-8 II. n. 348
PSP₁ 158.6 II. n. 568
PSP₁ 158.11-13 • II. n. 568
PSP₁ 159.6. II. n. 85
PSP₁ 159.7 II. n. 204
PSP₁ 159.7-10. II. n. 85
PSP₁ 160.5-7. II. n. 63
PSP₁ 161.6-9 II. n. 572
PSP₁ 172.11. II. n. 259
PSP₁ 173.8-12. II. n. 48
PsP₁ 173.8-174.4 • II. n. 223
PSP 180.14 II. n. 101
PSP₁ 189.1-3. II. n. 85, n. 402
PSP₁ 210.16 II. n. 117
PSP₁ 218.1-2. II. n. 336
PSP₁ 218.2-3 II. n. 327
PSP₁ 219.5-6 II. n. 327
PSP₁ 222.6-7. II. n. 206
PSP₁ 230.1 II. n. 206
PSP₁ 234.3-6. II. n. 403
PSP₁ 234.6 II. n. 85
●
PSP₁ 237.11-12. II. n. 325
PSP₁ 237.12-238.1. II. n. 313
PSP₁ 238.4 II. n. 314
●
PSP₁ 246.6-8 II. n. 331
PSP₁ 250.4-5. II. n. 67
PSP₁ 261.3-6. II. n. 348
PSP₁ 261.3-7. II. n. 450
PSP₁ 264.11-265.2 II. n. 313
●
PSP₁ 270.7-9 II. n. 15
PSP₁ 270.11-12 • II. n. 15
PSP₁ 273.12-13 • II. n. 145
PSP₁ 275.4-5 • II. n. 19
PSP₁ 276.1-3. II. n. 308
PSP₁ 276.5-8. II. n. 334
L
PSP₁ 288.9-17 • II. n. 471
PSP₁ 324.10 • II. n. 101
PSP₁ 336.3-339.2 • II. n. 349
PSP₁ 343.9. II. n. 450
PSP₁ 354.5-6. II. n. 216
PSP₁ 371.8-9 II. n. 348
PSP₁ 373.2 • II. n. 228
L
●
L
●
L
PSP₁ 373.6-7 • II. n. 310
PSP₁ 373.9-10. II. n. 98
PSP₁ 376.7 II. n. 206
PSP₁ 376.10-11 • II. n. 206
PSP₁ 377.1-2. II. n. 205
PSP₁ 392.8-9 II. n. 562
PSP₁ 393.9-12 • II. n. 15
PSP₁ 405.5-6. II. n. 568
PSP₁ 407.3-4. II. n. 577
PSP₁ 422.5-14 • II. n. 102
PSP₁ 423.7• II. n. 206
PSP₁ 428.2-5 II. n. 205
●
PSP₁ 432.14-433.3 • II. n. 362
PSP₁ 442.3. II. n. 367
PSP₁ 444.3-6. II. n. 423
PSP₁ 451.7 II. n. 367
●
PSP₁ 457.5 II. n. 375
●
PSP₁ 457.6-7. II. n. 425
PSP₁ 458.13-459.5 • II. n. 415
PSPL 458.14-15. II. n. 90
PSP₁ 459.5 II. n. 90
PSP₁ 459.9• II. n. 90
PSP₁ 459.14 II. n. 415
●
PSP₁ 465.2 II. n. 101
PSP₁ 492.11 II. n. 402
PSP₁ 492.11-12 • II. n. 422
PSP₁ 495.3-8. II. n. 15
PSP₁ 508.13 II. n. 15
L
PSP₁ 526.6-7 II. n. 102
●
L
PSP₁ 542.12-543.2 • II. n. 299
PSP₁ 549.2-4. II. n. 317
PSP₁ 549.5-7. II. n. 319
L
PSP₁ 551.1-4. II. n. 205
L
PSP₁ 567.2-4 • II. n. 204
581582
PSPL
567.7-8 II. n. 67
●
PSP₁ 568.4 II. n. 102
PSP₁ 569.1-9. II. n. 102
PSP₁ 593.11-594.1 • II. n. 102
*Pratyayasūtra
• II. 552
Pratyutpannabuddhasammu-
khāvasthitasamādhisūtra
• II. 360
Ratnacūḍaparipṛcchā
• II. 237, n. 461
Ratnākarasūtra
RK P 296a8-297a1 / D 285b • II.
345, n. 637
RK P 296a8-297a1 / D 285b • II.
345, n. 638
RK P 297a2-3 / D 285b • II.
345f., n. 639
RK P 297a3-4 / D 285b • II. 346,
n. 641
RK P 272a2 / D 261b. II. 346, n.
645
RK P 272a2 / D 261b. II. 346, n.
646
RK P 272a2 / D 261b. II. 346, n.
647
Ratnakūṭasūtra, see Kāśyapapari-
vartasūtra
Ratnāvalī
RĀ I.48 • II. n. 90
RĀ I.95 • II. n. 90
RĀ II.74 • II. n. 36
RĀ V.55 • II. n. 12
Śālistambasūtra
• II. n. 63, n. 102, n. 204
INDICES
Samadhirajasūtra
SR 7.5ab II. n. 172, n. 334
SR 9.27ab II. n. 15
●
Samyuttanikāya
SN 1.50-51. II. n. 481
SN I.158 II. n. 302
SN I.200 II. n. 302
SN 1.298-299. II. n. 85
SN II.1.5-6• II. n. 62
●
SN II.1.10-11. II. n. 300
SN II.2.13-14. II. n. 62
SN II.9.5-6 II. n. 300
SN II. 11-13, 98-104 • II. n. 304
SN II.17 II. n. 329
●
SN II.19-21• II. n. 403
SN II. 19.27-20.16 II. n. 292
●
SN II.22-23 II. n. 292, n. 403
●
SN II.25.11-12 • II. n. 62
SN II.25.17-20 • II. A. X
SN II.25.24-26.6 • II. n. 313
SN II.25.31-33 • II. n. 85
SN II.26-27. II. n. 10
SN II.28.7 II. n. 86
●
SN II.33-35 II. n. 292
SN II.33ff. II. n. 403
●
SN II.38-39. II. n. 292
SN II.41-42. II. n. 292
SN II.61.75-76. II. n. 102
SN II.65.5-6. II. n. 86
SN II.72.17-18. II. n. 67
SN II.72ff. II. n. 521
●
SN II. 112f. II. n. 403
SN II. 112-114. II. n. 292
SN II. 112-115. II. n. 109
SN II.178.8-10 II.
n. 327
●
SN II.186.13-15 • II. n. 327
SN II.273 II. n. 419
SN III.120.28-29 • II. n. 63
SN III.132.22-133.2 II. n. 478
●
SN III.142.29-31• II. n. 317
SN III.143.6-7. II. n. 316
●SN III. 143.8-9. II. n. 319
SN III.149.25-27 • II. n. 327
SN III.151.3-5. II. n. 327
SN IV.205.4-6. II. n. 315
SN V.59 II. n. 338
●
Sankhyakārikā
9. II. n. 142
Śāriputrābhidharmaśāstra
• II. n. 552, n. 558
●
Śātapañcāśatka
see Prasādapratibhodbhava
Śikṣāsamuccaya
SiS 235.1-8. II. n. 461
Ślokavārttika
ŚV I.12 • II. A. I
ŚV I.18 • II. A. I
ŚV I.23. II. A. I
SV on sabdanityatādhikaraṇa v.
24-30 II. n. 223
ŚV on sūnyavāda v. 252 • II. n.
259
Śūnyatāsaptati
ŚS 5. II. n. 573
ŚS 6. II. n. 117
Śünyatāsaptativṛtti
ŚSV 213.14-16 • II. n. 422
ed
SSV 213.17-22. II. n. 422
ed
SSV 218.3-6. II. n. 216
ed
ŚSV 225.14-23 • II. n. 40
ed
ŚSV
ŚSV
ŚSV
ed
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
ed
ed
ŚSV
ŚSV
ŚSV
ed
ed
ed
226.5-7. II. n. 338
234 • II. n. 117
237f. II. n. 573
●
240• II. n. 117
245.1-8. II. n. 300
245.4-7 • II. n. 63
ŚSV ed 250.35-36 • II. n. 90
SSV 252.34-37 • II. n. 206
ed
Suvikrāntavikrāmiparipṛcchā
• II. n. 594
Tarkajvālā
TJ D 52a2 / P 55a7-8 • II. n. 40
TJ D 60b4-5 / P 64a7-64b1 • II. n.
224
TJ P 77b2-3. II. n. 317
Tattvabodhinī
• II. A. V
Tattvasangrahapañjikā
TSP 2.9 II. A. I
●
TSP 12.11-15 • II. A. I
TSP 456 II. n. 518
Tshig gsal ba'i dka’ ba bshad pa /
bla ma tshong dpon pan di ta'i
gdam ngag
149.i.7-8 II. n. 162
150.i.8 II. n. 184
Udānavarga
1.3. II. n. 302
3.12. II. n. 306
26.24 II. n. 102
30.22 II. n. 505
●
31.1cd II. n. 216
Upāliparipṛcchā
67-70 II. n. 196ff., n. 339
583
*Upāyahṛdaya
• II. n. 541
Vaiseșikasūtra
II.25-32 II. n. 220584
Vajramaṇḍadhāraṇī
• II. n. 371
●
Vigrahavyāvartanī
VV 4 II. n. 136, n. 137
●
VV 18 II. n. 409
●
VV 29 II. 62, n. 137, n. 413
●
VV 30 II. 63, n. 136, 112
VV 31 II. n. 137, n. 443, A. X
●
VV 46-56. II. n. 543
VV 51. II. n. 409, A. X
VVed 53. II. n. 409
VVed 61.18-20 • II. n. 136
ed
VV 62.13 II. n. 137
72. II. n. 409
VV
VV 74.12-14 • II. n. 63
ed
ed
Vijñānakāya
II. n. 552
Vimalakīrtinirdeśasūtra
• II. n. 360
●
Vinaya
• II. 179, n. 346
●
Visuddhimagga
VM 520f. II. n. 61
VM 534f. II. n. 552
●
VM 532 II. n. 558
VM 535-538 • II. n. 558
●
VM 540f. II. n. 558
VM 571 II. n. 505
●
Vyakhyayukti
D 123a2-4/P 143a4-6 • II. n. 40
Visuddhimagga
VM 634 II. n. 81
VM 637. II. n. 81
INDICES
Yuktidīpikā
YD 62.8-12. II. n. 142
YD 66.18-20. II. n. 199
YD 78.13-16. II. n. 506
YD 109.13-14 • II. n. 142
YD 109-125. II. n. 142
YD 184.28-30. II. n. 199
Yuktişastikā
YŞ 19ab
YS 19cd II. n. 84
●
II. 35, n. 84, 38
YŞ 30• II. n. 310
YS 36ab II. n. 367
Yuktişastikāvṛtti
YŞVed homage verse. II. n. 15
YŞVed 20.11f. II. n. 15
●
YSV 21.21-22.2. II. n. 204
ed
YŞVed 22.3. II. n. 85
YŞVed 26.9-10. II. n. 306
YŞVed 27. II. n. 302
YŞVed 27.16-18 • II. n. 312
YŞVed 32.23. II. n. 336
YSVed 33.6-10. II. n. 326
YŞVed 47.1-14. II. n. 337
YŞVed 48.6-9 II. n. 63
YŞVed 58.13-25. II. n. 223
YŞVed 60 II. n. 302
●
YŞVed 65.15-16. II. n. 555
YŞVed 66.1-2. II. n. 252
YŞVed 71.3-5. II. n. 310
YŞVed 71.18-19. II. n. 90
YŞVed 73.16-17. II. n. 338
YŞVed 76.8-15 • II. n. 367
YŞVed 84.3-5. II. n. 85
YSVed 37.23-25. II. n. 383
YSV ad YS 43 and 44 • II. n. 85