ANNE MACDONALD
IN CLEAR WORDS
THE PRASANNAPADĀ, CHAPTER ONEÖSTERREICHISCHE AKADEMIE DER WISSENSCHAFTEN
PHILOSOPHISCH-HISTORISCHE KLASSE
SITZUNGSBERICHTE, 863. BAND
BEITRÄGE ZUR KULTUR- UND GEISTESGESCHICHTE ASIENS
NR. 86ÖSTERREICHISCHE AKADEMIE DER WISSENSCHAFTEN
PHILOSOPHISCH-HISTORISCHE KLASSE
SITZUNGSBERICHTE, 863. BAND
In Clear Words
The Prasannapadā, Chapter One
Vol. I
Introduction, Manuscript Description,
Sanskrit Text
Anne MacDonald
Verlag der
Österreichischen Akademie
der Wissenschaften
Wien 2015
11011
^888.
10001
ÃÒÒÀ
OAWVorgelegt von w. M. ERNST STEINKELLNER
in der Sitzung vom 24. Oktober 2014
Diese Publikation wurde einem anonymen, internationalen
Peer-Review-Verfahren unterzogen.
This publication has undergone the process of anonymous, international peer review.
Die verwendete Papiersorte ist aus chlorfrei gebleichtem Zellstoff hergestellt,
frei von säurebildenden Bestandteilen und alterungsbeständig.
Alle Rechte vorbehalten.
ISBN 978-3-7001-7673-2
Copyright © 2015 by
Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Wien
Druck und Bindung: Ferdinand Berger & Söhne Ges.m.b.H., 3580 Horn
Printed and bound in the EU
http://hw.oeaw.ac.at/7673-2
http://verlag.oeaw.ac.atPreface
General Introduction
Manuscript Description
Palm-leaf Manuscripts
Paper Manuscripts
Manuscript Relationships
Stemma
Sanskrit Text
Introduction
Critical Edition
Contents
Diplomatic Edition Ms P
Introduction
Diplomatic Edition
vii
1
33
35
53
78
88
99
101
113
305
307
315Preface
My interest in Madhyamaka goes back to the early years of my
graduate studies at the University of British Columbia (UBC) in
Vancouver, Canada, and I remember well the discussion in which my
esteemed Sanskrit professor Ashok Aklujkar suggested that I
consider turning my attention to the Prasannapadā, a text I was at the
time familiar with by name only. Trusting the guidance of this man
who seemed to know everything about the enchanting world of the
language of the gods, I agreed to do so, and the first seeds for the
present book were sown. I remain very grateful for Prof. Aklujkar's
expert tutelage in Sanskrit and the introduction to Indian philo-
sophical thought, as well as for his efforts in securing financial
support for my studies at UBC. Just as I was commencing my
doctoral work, Karin Preisendanz, who had received her training at
the University of Hamburg, Germany, was hired on in the
department, a lucky coincidence which would fling open for me the
doors to German Indological scholarship and heralded my initiation
into text-critical work. Although my dissertation topic at the time
focussed on differences between the thought of Nāgārjuna and
Candrakīrti, Prof. Preisendanz read with me, among other texts, the
section in the first chapter of the Prasannapadā on dependent-arising
and a large part of the Candrakīrti-Bhāviveka debate. When she later
accepted a position back in Hamburg, I was encouraged to fly off to
the Hanseatic city too, because there I would be able to deepen my
understanding of the Buddhist philosophical tradition with the
legendary Lambert Schmithausen. It was the move to the more
philologically oriented Institute for the Culture and History of India
and Tibet at the University of Hamburg that motivated me to switch
my dissertation topic to re-editing the first chapter of the Prasanna-
padā and set me, for the purpose of accomplishing my goal, on aviii
PREFACE
serious search for manuscripts of the work. More intent on gleaning
knowledge than quickly acquiring a doctoral degree, I immersed
myself in the German language and then took the opportunity to
attend Prof. Schmithausen's classes over the next few years, and
audited courses held by the Madhyamaka specialist Felix Erb, the
Tibetologist David Jackson, and the Indologists Karin Preisendanz
and Albrecht Wezler. I am especially grateful to Prof. Wezler for
having made my stay in Germany possible by employing me in the
Nepal-German Manuscript Project (NGMPP) for nearly five years,
and for the happy Christmases spent with his family and troupe of
Tibetan mastiffs.
The present book is the result of a comprehensive reworking and
expansion of its earlier doctoral dissertation incarnation. A period of
poor health prevented me from preparing the dissertation for
publication once it was completed, but in the end this merely kept me
from publishing prematurely, because already in 2005 Yoshiyasu
Yonezawa of Taishō University, Tokyo, announced the discovery of
an important and complete palm-leaf manuscript of the Prasannapadā
preserved in the Potala Palace in Lhasa. The manuscript was not
accessible to scholars, but Prof. Yonezawa informed me that he had
been permitted to make a hand-copy of it, and with the hope that
either a microfilm of the manuscript or the hand-copy itself would
become available, I decided to refrain from publishing until I could
consult its text or until it had become clear that this would be
impossible. My decision proved to be a wise one, because during a
visit to Tokyo in 2011, Prof. Yonezawa very generously gave me his
meticulous transcription of the manuscript's first chapter. His
magnanimity allowed me to confirm previously speculative readings
and to emend numerous others in my Sanskrit critical text, as well as
to identify interpolations, and facilitated my understanding of the
relationships between the older (extant and also some non-extant)
manuscripts of the Prasannapadă. Access to the Potala manuscript
was also crucial for gaining newfound insight into the impact on the
Tibetan translation of one of the Sanskrit manuscripts relied upon by
its translators, information that will be indispensable for the editing
of further chapters of the work.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
ix
A good number of individuals have contributed, in myriad ways, to
this book reaching its present form. I am first and foremost deeply
indebted to Prof. Schmithausen, who read most of my dissertation,
helped solve some knotty problems, and offered many invaluable
suggestions for improvement, and who more recently read large
sections of my book manuscript and again made illuminating remarks
and kindly and patiently answered my questions. Any references to
Chinese materials in the notes to the translation which are not
attributed to another source were provided by him. It was a
tremendous privilege to have studied with such a brilliant and
inspiring scholar, and I express here my lasting gratitude for his
instruction and for his input to the present project. I am also grateful
to Prof. Preisendanz for her instruction, her help in acquiring a
microfilm of ms L and a photocopy of the Rome copy of ms D, and
for having fastidiously read the beginning parts of my dissertation.
She was also instrumental in my move from Hamburg to Vienna,
where I have been able to benefit from a uniquely rich academic
environment and interaction with many excellent scholars, both in the
Department of South Asian, Tibetan and Buddhist Studies of the
University of Vienna and in the Institute for the Cultural and
Intellectual History of Asia (IKGA) of the Austrian Academy of
Sciences. Shortly after I arrived in Vienna to take a University
position, Prof. Ernst Steinkellner, then director of the IKGA, kindly
invited me to participate in his Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā project, for
which I was and remain extremely thankful, not only for the exciting
opportunities it brought but also for needed financial support.
It was toward the end of a delightful and profitable five-month
sojourn in Kyoto, generously arranged by Prof. Shoryu Katsura, that
I was able, upon the invitation of Prof. Akira Saito to Tokyo, to meet
with Prof. Yonezawa and receive the all-important file of the Potala
manuscript. A cursory look at the hand-copy quickly revealed that a
thorough reexamination of my earlier work, and reconsideration and
revision of many aspects of the critical text and related material
would be necessary, but the past couple of years in the idyllic
research oasis of the IKGA—thanks to the beneficence of its late
director Dr. Helmut Krasser-has allowed exactly that. To all of the
persons mentioned I express my sincere gratitude.X
PREFACE
I owe thanks to the staff at the Bodleian Library in Oxford for their
aid with respect to the precious palm-leaf manuscript of the
Prasannapadā preserved there by name I know only Gillian Evison
and Doris Nicholson-who at my request arranged for the
manuscript to be photographed despite initial reports that it was too
fragile to be filmed. Prof. Wezler, Director General of the NGMPP
from 1982 to 2002, helped procure the microfilms of the NGMPP
manuscripts, and additionally arranged for a photocopy of the first
chapter of the Tibetan translation of the Prasannapadā to be made
from the copy of the Narthang Tanjur kept in the Staatsbibliothek in
Berlin. Unfortunately, this copy suffered water damage during WW
II, and the photocopy I received was in many places unreadable. I
therefore also thank Prof. David Seyfort Ruegg for having made
available his photocopy of the Narthang Tanjur's first chapter, and
Burkhard Quessel for arranging for its copying. Dr. Susmita Mallick
photocopied the first chapter of manuscript N on a visit to Calcutta,
after two years of unsuccessful attempts by Wezler and Preisendanz
to order a copy of it from the Asiatic Society. I am also grateful to the
Société Asiatique librarian Marie-Claude Karunatilleke for providing
me with a photocopy of manuscript M, the Cambridge Library
librarian for sending a microfilm of manuscript L, the staff of the
previous Institute for the Advanced Study of World Religions in New
York for sending microfiches of manuscripts G and K, Dr. Mauro
Maggi, previously the librarian for the Oriental Department of the
Istituto Italiano per l'Africa e l'Oriente in Rome, for providing me
with a photocopy of the Rome copy of manuscript D, and the late
Prof. J.W. de Jong for sending me his wife's transcription of the
same manuscript.
It is a privilege to acknowledge the bodhisattva-like help of other
colleagues and friends, without which the quality of these pages
would be greatly diminished. Prof. Jonathan Silk altruistically sent
me his draft translation of the Kaśyapaparivartasūtra, Iain Sinclair
repeatedly brought bibliographic material and other information
related to manuscript production in Nepal to my attention, and Dr.
Toshikazu Watanabe and Dr. Horst Lasic were always forthcoming
and extremely helpful whenever I ran into obstacles related to
Buddhist logic. Prof. Dorji Wangchuk, Dr. Orna Almogi andPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
xi
especially Dr. Kurt Tropper kindly answered questions regarding the
Tibetan edition. Dr. Helmut Krasser decided to convert my originally
Roman-script Sanskrit edition into Devanagarī, and thus took over
the demanding job of formatting its text. Any problems I encountered
when using the Critical Text Editor program were resolved through
the sage and patient counsel of Dr. Cristina Pecchia. I additionally
thank for their advice and help Dr. Ritsu Akahane, Dr. William
Ames, Prof. Shobha Rani Dash, Dr. Dragomir Dimitrov, Prof. Eli
Franco, Prof. Paul Hackett, Dr. David Higgins, Dr. Pascale Hugon,
Prof. Birgit Kellner, Dr. Ulrich Timme Kragh, Bruno Lainé, Dr.
Xuezhu Li, Dr. Hong Luo, Dr. Christian Luzcanits, Dr. Philipp Maas,
Dr. Mudagamuwe Maithrimurthi, Koji Matsumoto, Dr. Yasutaka
Muroya, Dr. Jundo Nagashima, Prof. Claus Oetke, Dr. Mahes Raj
Pant, Dr. Carola Roloff, Prof. Alexander von Rospatt, Prof. Akira
Saito, Dr. Bernhard Scheid, Kashinath Tamot, Dr. Himal Trikha,
Prof. Kevin Vose, Prof. Chlodwig Werba, Prof. Chizuko Yoshimizu,
and Prof. Akira Yuyama. Philip Pierce proofread the English with
exceptional care, and also caught typos in the cited Sanskrit and
Tibetan. Dennis Johnson checked numerous primary and secondary
references and helped bring the bibliography into a presentable form,
and King Chung Lo proofread the Tibetan edition. Last but certainly
not least, I thank Christian Ferstel for his skillful help with for-
matting and Jürgen Schörflinger for finalizing the Stemma design. I
apologize for any omissions, and of course take responsibility for all
remaining errors. Finally, I gratefully acknowledge the financial
support of the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) within the context of the
project "Buddhist Literature and its Context" (P 23196-G15), and
heartily thank the Austrian Academy of Sciences for accepting and
publishing these two volumes.
This book is dedicated to my beloved parents Rev. Freda and Rev.
W. Graham MacDonald, who have supported this endeavour from
the start with unflagging interest, munificence and encouragement.General Introduction
Contemporary scholars' interest in Candrakīrti's Prasannapadā
(henceforth PSP) an object of investigation of primarily Indian
intellectuals from at least the seventh¹ until the twelfth century, and
for the next eight hundred years the domain of scholars in the Hima-
layas and on the Tibetan plateau-is a relatively recent phenomenon,
originally piqued by the work's opening promise to provide elucida-
tion for Nāgārjuna's sometimes terse and, for early researchers, often
puzzling Mulamadhyamakakārikā (henceforth MMK). In the initial
years of Western academic inquiry into the two works (the latter is
couched in the former), debates focussing on the meaning of the Ma-
dhyamaka school's philosophical claims that everything is empty and
that the things of the world neither arise nor pass away were sparked;
of particular concern was the Madhyamikas' understanding of the
ultimate ontological nature of phenomena and the status of nirvāṇa
and the person who attains it. These debates, in ever-changing garb,
have continued to the present day, stimulated and fecundated by
broad-based philosophical engagement with the MMK and PsP. The
1 Seyfort Ruegg (1981: 71 and n. 228; 1982: 513f.) has estimated Candrakīrti's dates
as 600-650 CE. Lang (2003: 7) suggests ca. 550-650. Kimura (1999: 211) argues for
570-640 on the basis of Candrakīrti's reference to Dharmapāla as a contemporary
(he proposes 550-620 for Dharmapāla). On Candrakīrti, see, e.g., Tillemans 1990:
13f.; Scherrer-Schaub 1991: xxxiff.; Lang 2003: 8ff.; Kragh 2006: 21, n. 21.
2 The text may have been studied into the following century in Kashmir (cf. Nadou
1980: 237ff.).
3 That the MMK also circulated independently has been confirmed by the discovery
of a partially preserved Sanskrit manuscript of the work, which Shaoyong Ye dates
to the sixth-seventh century; see Ye 2007a, 2008a, 2008b, 2009, 2011b. A complete
but still unavailable Sanskrit manuscript of the MMK is thought to be preserved in
Drepung monastery in Tibet (cf. Ye 2009: 309).2
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
documentation, analysis and appraisal of Nāgārjuna's and Candra-
kīrti's critiques of the tenets of their co-Buddhists, as well as the
clarification of points of dispute and the identification of non-
Buddhist opponents, have contributed to the attempt to fathom the
Madhyamaka self-understanding. It is without doubt to the advantage
of this quest that Candrakīrti's elucidation of the MMK's twenty-
seven chapters makes room for detailed discussion of matters
pertinent to him and the sixth/seventh-century intellectuals in his
circle, for the topics considered-some directly related to Nāgārju-
na's verses, many not often serve to shed light on his conception of
key Madhyamaka tenets and related issues. The first chapter of the
PSP, the longest and most wide-ranging of the work, has in recent
years drawn the attention of a number of scholars because it is here
that Candrakīrti delineates his views on important themes vis-à-vis
those of significant peers and adversaries, and in which he defends
the earlier MMK commentator Buddhapalita from the criticism of the
MMK commentator and logician Bhāviveka.+ The appeal of the latter
discussion in large part derives from the fact that Tibetan exegetes
pinpoint it as the source of the subsequent bifurcation of the Madhya-
maka school into discrete streams and as holding the key to the
controversial "Prāsangika-Svātantrika distinction."
4
"
My own interest in the first chapter of the PsP, like that of other
scholars, was kindled by a desire to penetrate the intricacies of the
debate with Bhāviveka, and also to investigate and begin to evaluate
the until recently neglected portion of this chapter in which Candra-
kīrti rejects cardinal aspects of Dignāga's epistemological project.
4 I employ the name Bhāviveka for the author of the Prajñāpradīpa, an appellation
found twice in the palm-leaf manuscript that I refer to as ms P, namely, at its
equivalents for PsPM §63 and §67 [PSP₁ 36.13 and 38.12]; the name has been “cor-
rected" from Bhāviveka to Bhāvaviveka at P's equivalent for PsP₁ 196.4; the text is
missing for PSP₁ 351.15. The name Bhāviveka is also found twice in my ms D (= de
Jong's ms R): at the equivalents for PsP §67 and PsP₁ 351.15; Bhāvaviveka occurs
in D at its equivalents for PsP §63 and PsP₁ 196.4. The palm-leaf manuscript I refer
to as ms Q, of which I have access only to the readings of the first chapter of the
PSP, attests Bhāviveka at its equivalent for PSP §67 and Bhāvaviveka at PsPM §63
(for the other manuscripts' readings, see PsPM). Bhāviveka is found throughout the
Sanskrit commentary *Lakṣaṇaṭīkā (*LȚ). On the name of this author, see Iida 1980:
5f.; Seyfort Ruegg 1990: 69, n. 1; Lindtner 1995: 37-39; Watanabe 1998: 143, n. 3.
M
M
MPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
3
The main task I decided to undertake, however, was the establish-
ment of an improved Sanskrit edition of the first chapter of the PSP.
Re-editing the chapter had become a concrete possibility because
previously unknown Sanskrit manuscripts of the entire work had
been discovered by scholars in the years following the publication of
de La Vallée Poussin's edition of the PsP and new emendations had
been suggested, though these lay scattered in various publications.
My own search had also unearthed additional Sanskrit manuscripts,
some of which revealed themselves to be extremely valuable for the
determination of correct and/or probable readings. It seemed only
fitting that I should also prepare a translation for the entire chapter in
order to make my interpretation of the text, especially for challenging
passages, transparent to readers, and include annotations that would
explicate and justify my choices for the critical Sanskrit text, as well
as provide historical and philosophical background.
That critical reconsideration of the PsP's Sanskrit text is necessary
has been obvious from de La Vallée Poussin's numerous reports in
the notes to his PSP edition about problematic readings and lacunae in
the manuscripts he relied on, and from the fact that the manuscripts
consulted by later scholars do not always offer better readings for
corrupt passages or supply lost text. It has been interesting to note
that some of the same textual problems described by de La Vallée
Poussin as present in his PsP manuscripts also occur in the oldest
manuscripts available to the present study, one of which is estimated
to date to the late twelfth or early thirteenth century. Clearly, but not
unexpectedly since the process of copying new manuscripts invites
human error, the text of the PsP had developed a number of
blemishes in the centuries following its composition. It is unknown if
these defects should also, or indeed predominantly, be attributed to a
general neglect of the PSP for its nearly first four centuries, a
possibility raised by Kevin Vose's hypotheses on Candrakīrti's
importance or rather lack of it in India. According to Vose, the
5
5 Compare the case of Jinendrabuddhi’s Viśālāmalavatī Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā, in
regard to which the writer of the colophon in its sole extant manuscript records that
the work had been neglected and that on account of this, the manuscript he dis-4
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
PSP and the Madhyamakāvatāra (MA), Candrakīrti's independent,
non-commentarial work, met with little or no interest during his
lifetime and were basically ignored from the time of their
composition until their "rediscovery" in the eleventh and twelfth
centuries. Basing his conclusions on the dearth of commentarial
writing on Candrakīrti's works before the twelfth century, the silence
of Madhyamikas such as Avalokitavrata, Śantarakṣita and Kamalaśīla
with regard to his critiques of aspects of Bhäviveka's and Dignāga's
positions, the fact that neither the PsP nor the MA was translated
during the early diffusion of Buddhism to Tibet, and the lack of
information on and writings by the individuals named in Tibetan lists
of the Indian Prasangika lineage, Vose argues that Candrakīrti was an
insignificant philosopher in his homeland, too conservative in crucial
matters of epistemology to be taken seriously by his Madhyamaka
cohorts. Vose thus speculates that in the years following Candra-
kīrti's death, his oeuvre may have escaped disappearing altogether
because conscientious librarians or scribes concerned with manu-
script preservation safeguarded it. "Most strongly," he writes, “we
can imagine the existence of a marginal school of thought that did not
champion Candrakīrti with new treatises but studied and
preserved his texts." Exactly how Vose envisions this "best case"
scenario is unclear, for he later states, "Rather than preserved in an
unbroken lineage established by Candrakīrti himself, we see Candra-
kīrti's main texts-however they may have survived up to this
8
covered and rescued had suffered serious damage by rats; see Steinkellner et al.
2005: xxxiv-xxxvi.
6 Vose (2009: 27) describes the rediscovery of Candrakīrti's works: “Instead,
important eleventh- and twelfth-century Indian scholars suddenly took interest in
these forgotten texts ...."
7 Vose (ibid., 9) considers Candrakīrti to have held an “obstinately conservative
position ... which undoubtedly contributed to his marginal status for hundreds of
years afterwards." See ibid., 21ff.
8 Ibid., 18: “One can infer that the very survival of Candrakīrti's writings down to
the time of Jayānanda could only have been brought about by some kind of
following, whether Candrakīrti's writings were preserved in monastic libraries or
transmitted in scribal families."
⁹ Ibid.
9PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
point-receiving broader attention beginning around the year
1000,"10
10
5
As valuable and stimulating as Vose's hypotheses on Candrakīrti in
India are, one suspects, given that his main arguments are in large
part derived from the ostensible silence of pre-eleventh-century
Madhyamaka philosophers," that this silence might admit of slightly
less radical conclusions, especially when further factors are taken
into consideration.¹2 Of his alternatives for explaining the survival of
Candrakīrti's works, the postulation that Candrakīrti's views inspired
a following of philosophers-whether an actual "school" and
whether as marginal as Vose would have it remain open questions—
who studied and taught his treatises would seem to be the more
reasonable one. Indeed, the presumed reflections of Candrakīrti's
ideas in Santideva's Bodhicaryavatāra (8th c.), the references to and
close familiarity with his works on the part of Prajñākaramati (10th
c.), the fact that Ratnākaraśānti (late 10th c., early 11th c.) apparently
found it necessary to refute his views,¹3 and the interest in and broad
accessibility of Candrakīrti's compositions to the tantric writers may
rather speak against the supposition that his works lay for centuries
sunk in oblivion on library shelves¹4 or in the domiciles of scribes.
Although probably overshadowed by the early Yogācāra-Madhya-
maka tradition, this strand of Madhyamaka thought may in fact have
been quite stable and robust, energized by the insights of each
succeeding generation, and authoritative and widespread enough to
I have had the influence it did on the writers and translators of the
eleventh and twelfth centuries. Considering our present interest,
namely, the extant PsP manuscripts, in the light of this scenario, the
Ibid., 27.
11 Vose (ibid.) speaks of 1000 CE as being the time that Candrakīrti's works began to
receive more attention but is aware that Prajñākaramati was also active in the 10th c.
(he dates him 950-1030).
¹2 I shall not go into a detailed discussion of the matter on this occasion.
13
See Luo forthcoming.
¹4 As Vose (ibid., 18, n. 10) also notes, manuscripts did not last long in India’s hot
and humid climate. It is sometimes stated that 200 years was the upper limit of
survival; many succumbed much earlier on account of molds, insects and rodents.6
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
corruptions we encounter in the PsP's oldest manuscripts might then
equally be the result of the repeated copying of the text within an
unbroken and vigorous but non-commentarial lineage of Madhyami-
kas who championed Candrakīrti's causes. We do know that the PSP
was an important work for, among others, eleventh-century Kashmiri
scholars erudite in the intricacies of Madhyamaka thought,¹5 and that
some of them were cognizant of textual problems in the manuscripts
at their disposal. The availability of a PsP manuscript in Lhasa in the
early years of the twelfth century that is documented as hailing from
eastern Aparānta indicates that the work was also studied in this part
of India in the tenth or eleventh century; unfortunately, the exact
location of Aparānta is still not known. One of the two palm-leaf
manuscripts at the disposal of the present study testifies to interest in
the PSP in Nepal in the late twelfth or thirteenth century; the other
may also have been copied there but its date is uncertain. ¹6 Both of
these manuscripts testify to attempts, some of which may have
occurred in previous centuries, to rectify through comparison with
other manuscripts of the PSP a number of the flaws that had crept into
the textual tradition. In this connection one should not neglect to
mention the *Lakṣaṇaṭīkā (*LT), a commentary cum student notes on
the PSP probably composed in the early twelfth century, which
Yonezawa holds was written under the supervision of Abhayākara-
gupta at Nālandā or Vikramaśīla monastery."
16
15
Chapter One and its Content
The meticulous defense and elucidation of Madhyamaka positions in
the first chapter of the PsP must have been welcomed by Candra-
15 Note that the colophon of the Tibetan version of Candrakīrti's Catuḥśatakaṭīkā,
which like the PSP, was translated by Pa tshab nyi ma grags in Kashmir, traces Pa
tshab's pandita collaborator's Madhyamaka lineage back two generations to the
renowned scholar Ratnavajra.
¹6 It is not certain that the Potala palm-leaf manuscript, i.e., ms Q, was written in
Nepal and a detailed analysis of its script is required in order to estimate its date of
copying.
17
See Yonezawa 2001: 4-8, 27 and Yonezawa 2004: 117f.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
7
kīrti's immediate and wider circles. Candrakīrti in fact allots only
slightly more than a quarter of his first chapter's commentary to
remarks on the two mangala verses that open Nāgārjuna's MMK and
the fourteen kārikās that make up its first chapter, and devotes the
large remainder of the chapter to addressing a number of pressing
issues connected with logical, ontological and epistemological
theories and ideas propagated and legitimated by his opponents, most
of which would have been familiar to his followers. The principal
and potentially most influential competitor who had to be dealt with
was the learned Madhyamaka scholar Bhāviveka, who, as stated, had
criticized the logical method employed by and various stances of his
forerunner, Buddhapālita, numerous times in his Prajñāpradīpa.¹8 Of
primary concern to Candrakīrti was Bhāviveka's critique of Buddha-
palita's reliance on consequences (prasanga) for the demonstration
of the ultimate nature of things and Bhāviveka's insistence on inde-
pendent inferences (svatantrānumāna) for such. Candrakīrti allocates
nearly a fifth of the chapter to a vindication of Buddhapālita's use of
consequences and to the thorough discrediting of Bhäviveka's
attempt to enforce the employment of inferences; in the course of his
argumentation, however, Candrakīrti makes clear that he does not
intend a global rejection of inferences and rather vetoes only the
particular type of inference utilized and advocated by Bhāviveka.
Indeed, one of Candrakīrti's main goals in the section is, as Bhāvi-
veka's was earlier, to upgrade, i.e., modernize, the methodological
tools used by his school in debate. Bhāviveka's criticism of Buddha-
palita ensued from his reaction to important developments that had
occurred within Buddhism's logical-epistemological fold in the first
half of the sixth century, that is, within Dignāga's camp, which had
resulted in Bhāviveka's integration of the logical theory and
procedure evolved and prescribed there into his own school, which
must have appeared to him as one that had been working with
obsolete tools and was therefore open to attack. Candrakīrti, born
into a period in which Dignāga's logic had become authoritative,
himself erudite in the intricacies of logical procedure and well versed
in Dignāga's writings on the subject, was aware of the demands of
18 Saito (1984: xxiv) reports that Ejima counts twenty occasions of criticism noted by
Avalokitavrata.8
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
the day and the threat, and his response to Bhāviveka served the
secondary purpose of providing him with a platform from which to
address and possibly preempt criticism from the logical-epistemolo-
gical faction itself as regards the Madhyamikas' logical procedures.
Candrakīrti's partial yet calculated acquiescence to Bhāviveka's
demand for formal inferences that had him sanctioning the use of in-
ferences acknowledged by the opponent but not by the Madhyamika
(paraprasiddhānumāna) was, as Bhāviveka's methodological renova-
tions were, a response to his intellectual environment; he was spurred
by it to clarify the Madhyamaka argumentative methods, to
distinguish their characteristics from those of the prevailing type
employed in debate, and to justify the deviations from Dignāga's
rules.
Later on in the first chapter of the PsP, Candrakīrti focusses his atten-
tion fundamental epistemological theories propounded by
Dignāga, devoting nearly as much of the chapter to the rebuttal of
these ideas as he did to his rebuttal and critique of Bhāviveka.
Candrakīrti's overriding aim throughout his lengthy refutation of the
particular characteristic (svalakṣaṇa), portrayed as the bare percept,
and his argumentation against Dignāga's understanding and etymolo-
gizing of the word pratyakṣa (i.e., as "direct perception") is, first and
foremost, to demonstrate the inappropriateness of Dignāga's attempt
to establish, via his particular characteristic and the consciousness
that knows it, a more “refined" plane of reality that would be situated
above the unexamined everyday level-regardless of whether Dig-
nāga might portray it as ultimate reality or, inasmuch as it is reduced
to consciousness from the Yogācāra point of view, as a preliminary
level of reality. As Candrakīrti asseverates, the positing of such a
level is mistaken and misleading, for when the ultimate is not topical,
the world and its constituents should simply be accepted as general
consensus understands them. When, on the other hand, the ultimate
nature of these common-sense phenomena is the matter of interest
and for the sake of determining it they are analyzed, they dissolve
completely, leaving no room whatsoever for any (provisional or
final) entities. Demonstrating that Dignāga's views lead to problems,
Candrakīrti points out that Dignāga's postulation of a (sva)lakṣaṇa
that would exist independently of its related lakṣya makes a travestyPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
9
of the Buddha's teaching of dependent-arising and annihilates the
crucial difference, accepted by all Mahāyānists, between the surface
level and ultimate reality. Dignāga is accused of confounding the
surface level (samvrti) with the ultimate level, and thereby of ruining
the surface level, a level of "reality" that, as such, is to be accepted
without any philosophical analysis. A substantial point of interest in
Candrakīrti's critique of Dignāga's understanding of pratyakṣa-for
Dignāga the cognition direct perception-is Candrakīrti's position
that for Madhyamikas, as for ordinary persons (and indeed for certain
other Buddhists), the primary referent of the word pratyakṣa is not
consciousness, but rather the object perceived. Even though later
interpretations, especially in Tibet, of Candrakīrti's critique of Bhāvi-
veka would substantially affect the characterizations, internal
demarcations and, as a result, the self-understanding of the Madhya-
maka school, his remarks in regard to Dignāga's views had virtually
no impact on the logical-epistemological tradition in India; they did,
however, lead to heated debates in Tibet. For the Madhyamikas in
Candrakīrti's immediate and subsequent tradition, however, the
conversation with Dignāga explained precisely why their fellow
Mahāyānist's seductive epistemological theories, particularly that of
samvṛti-level bare particulars, had to be rejected.
19 See MacDonald 2011.
19
In the section just antecedent to the attack on Dignāga's epis-
temological views, Candrakīrti addresses opponents (previously
presumed by scholars to belong to Dignāga's tradition, or to be
Dignāga himself or even Bhāviveka) who can only be identified as
Naiyāyikas. These opponents dispute the Madhyamaka claim that
things do not come into being on the ground that such an assertion
requires ascertainment via some sort of valid cognition, arguing that
if the Madhyamikas admit that this cognition exists, then something,
i.e., the means of valid cognition, must itself come into being and
exist, which would thus confute the Madhyamaka assertion. If, on the
other hand, the Madhyamaka position is that not even valid cognition
exists, then the view that things do not arise is bereft of certitude. The
same argumentation, in a more abbreviated form than Candrakīrti10
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
presents it, is encountered in Pakṣilasvāmin Vātsyāyana's Nyāya-
bhāṣya and on two occasions in Uddyotakara's Nyāyabhāṣyavārttika.
A less philosophical discussion with the Conservative Buddhists (the
so-called "Hinayānists") is sandwiched between the argumentation
directed toward Bhāviveka and the confrontation with the Naiyāyi-
kas. The Conservative Buddhist opponent objects to the Madhya-
maka school's radicalizing of the principle of dependent-arising to
the extent that dependent-arising is characterized, as it is in the
opening verses to the MMK, as being without arising or ceasing,
without one thing or separate things, and without coming or going,
and charges the Mādhyamikas with contradicting the verbal
testimony of the highest authority, namely, the Buddha. The
Conservative Buddhist's citing of Canonical verses and prose
statements which unequivocally refer, for example, to the coming
into existence and subsequent cessation of things and which thus
appear to confirm that dependent-arising is indeed qualified by
arising and ceasing, is taken as an opportunity by Candrakīrti to edify
his co-Buddhists as to the difference between interpretive and
definitive scriptures, and inspires him to cite a number of passages
from both the Conservative Buddhists' and the Mahāyānists' scrip-
tural collections in support of the actual non-arising, etc., of things
that dependently arise. Presented in the section are passages from the
Agamas, the Vinaya, the Udanavarga, the Akṣayamatisūtra, the
Samādhirājasūtra, the Kaśyapaparivartasūtra, the Drdhādhyāśaya-
paripṛcchāsūtra, the Vajramandadhāraṇī, and the Upaliparipṛcchā,
some of which preserve the only known Sanskrit for their respective
work.
Further citations from the Agamas, and from sūtras not mentioned
above, as well as from śāstras, are found in the other sections of the
PsP's first chapter. Of relevance to our knowledge of the temporal
succession in which the individual works in Candrakīrti's oeuvre
were produced are the references to and citations from the
Madhyamakāvatāra, which appear to indicate that this work was
composed prior to the PsP, and the lack of references to any of thePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
11
other commentaries attributed to Candrakīrti.20 The brief citations
from Buddhapalita's Mūlamadhyamakavṛtti and Bhāviveka's
Prajñāpradīpa, for which only the Tibetan translation is otherwise
available, 21 are of significance in that they provide the original
Sanskrit or a close approximation thereof for the quoted passages.
Candrakīrti additionally cites from works other than the MMK that
he attributes to Nāgārjuna, namely, the Yuktiṣaṣṭikā, the Vigraha-
vyāvartanī and the Lokātītastava, from Aryadeva's Catuḥśataka,
Vasubandhu's Madhyantavibhāga, from Mahāyāna sūtras such as the
Śālistambasūtra, the Lalitavistara, the Ratnacūḍaparipṛcchã and the
Ratnākarasūtra, as well as from Pāṇini's Aṣṭādhyāyī. Candrakīrti has
the tendency to classify the canonical Abhidharma material he makes
reference to as authoritative testimony (āgama).
22
The final section of the chapter is devoted to the explication of MMK
I.2-14, the kārikās by way of which Nagarjuna refutes the four
conditions (pratyaya) held to be responsible for the coming into
being of things, their effects. The opponent party in this section is
again the Conservative Buddhists, who substantiate their view that
the conditions are truly existent things which bring about the arising
of other truly existent things by arguing that the Buddha himself
taught the four conditions. Candrakīrti must have had Buddhapalita's
commentary on the MMK before him, either in memorized or
manuscript form, as he composed his commentarial remarks on the
kārikās of this section: he often reiterates Buddhapalita's interpre-
tation of specific kārikās, or elements thereof, and thus demonstrates
20 Felix Erb (1997: 14; see also 9ff.) suggests that Candrakīrti's works were
produced in the following order: Madhyamakāvatārabhāṣya, Prasannapadā, Yukti-
ṣaṣṭikāvṛtti, Śūnyatāsaptativṛtti, Catuḥśatakaṭīkā. My ms Q contains a
references
to the Madhyamakāvatāra that are clearly interpolations, which leads one to wonder
if some of the others in the PsP text we have received might not also be later
additions, although at least one seems to be necessary for Candrakīrti’s argumenta-
tion and thus intrinsic to the work.
2¹ The first chapter of Buddhapalita's commentary on the MMK is not preserved in
the BP manuscript discovered and edited by Shaoyong Ye.
22 As pointed out and discussed in my translation's annotation to the relevant
passages, Candrakīrti does not always quote his sources literally (or did his sources
read differently?).12
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
his endorsement of it. Whether he also had Bhāviveka's commentary
before him is less clear; his tendency to repeat, sometimes in a
revised form, Buddhapalita's comments but to overwhelmingly
ignore variant interpretations given by Bhāviveka may betray an
intent to restore pride of place (at least as concerns earlier com-
mentators) to Buddhapalita's work. On occasion Buddhapalita, Bhā-
viveka and Candrakīrti present similar interpretations for the MMK I
verses; at times Candrakīrti apparently finds the explanations and
arguments of both of his predecessors unsatisfactory, and deviating
from these, offers an alternative analysis.23 I considered it meaning-
ful, given that most translations of chapters of the PSP focus only on
Candrakīrti's comments, to begin to investigate in a very preliminary
way the degree to which Candrakīrti relies on the remarks and
commentarial style of Buddhapālita and Bhāviveka, and have
therefore included in my annotation some basic observations
regarding the interpretation of the kārikās presented by the earlier
commentators. 24
Previous Investigations, Editions, and Translations
The first reference to the PsP by a European was made by Brian
Houghton Hodgson (1801-1894), a British civil servant appointed in
1820 to Residentship in Kathmandu, when he included it in a list of
Buddhist Sanskrit literature in Nepal in an essay published in 1828.25
Misled, however, by an erroneous designation of the work, Hodgson
23 Unfortunately, the MMK commentaries composed by, according to
Avalokitavrata, Devaśarman, Gunaśrī, and Guṇamati, are neither extant in Sanskrit
nor available in translation (see Kajiyama 1963: 37f.); it is thus impossible to know
if Candrakīrti draws on their comments when he deviates from the interpretations of
Buddhapālita and Bhāviveka. Scholars who read Chinese will be able to determine if
he ever relies on Sthiramati's commentary.
24 For detailed remarks on the PsP's relationship to earlier commentaries, especially
as regards MMK XVII, see Kragh 2009.
25
See Hodgson 1828: 431 and Hodgson 1874: 20.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
13
wrongly recorded the PsP's name as "Vineya Sútra."26 This mistake
in appellation was rectified shortly after Hodgson passed on one of
his manuscripts of the PsP to the Société Asiatique in Paris by the
French scholar Eugène Burnouf (1801-1852), who identified the
work, in accord with the name found in manuscript's colophon, as the
"Madhyamakavṛtti" and who realized, upon reading Candrakīrti’s
opening verses, that the composition was specifically a commentary
on Nagarjuna's MMK. The revised determination of the name and
character of the work as well as Burnouf's brief but somewhat
perplexed observations on Madhyamaka philosophy were presented
in his 1844 "Introduction à l'histoire du Buddhisme indien," where
alongside his careful description of and comments on the work he
noted that the Prajñāpāramitā literature's proclivity for negations—
characterized by him as "audacious" is in the MMK taken even
further ("si cela est possible") to intend metaphysical non-existence.
Burnouf admitted that he found it difficult to understand how the
MMK could have presented itself as an authority on Śākyamuni
Buddha's doctrine, since, he opined, any Brahmin who wanted to
decimate Buddhism would need to do little more than adopt
Nāgārjuna's and Candrakīrti's arguments.27 Comments like these by
Burnouf with respect to Prajñāpāramitā and Madhyamaka literature
and his pegging of Nāgārjuna's (and by implication Candrakīrti’s)
general philosophical view as a "scholastic nihilism"28 profoundly
influenced other nineteenth-century scholars, some of whom cast
severe value judgements on Buddhism as a whole, and were at least
26 Hodgson corrects his 1828 reference "Vineya Sútra" to "Vinaya Sútra” in the 1874
reprint of the essay. Hodgson collected at least two manuscripts of the PsP. The
manuscript that passed on to the Société Asiatique in Paris had, Burnouf reports,
the words "vinaya patra" written on its first folio; the manuscript that Hodgson
presented to the Asiatic Society of Bengal has “vinaya” written in the left margin of
its folios.
27 Burnouf (1844: 560): “On a peine à comprendre comment ce livre peut se donner
pour une des autorités de la doctrine de Śâkyamuni. Il semble qu'un Brâhmane
voulant réduire au néant cette doctrine, ne pourrait mieux faire que d'adopter les
arguments négatifs de Nâgârdjuna et de son commentateur.”
28 See Burnouf 1844: 522, 559ff.; Tuck 1990: 32f.; de Jong 1949: ix. On Burnouf
and his work, cf. de Jong 1974: 66-74; Buffetrille and Lopez 2010: 5ff.14
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
partially or indirectly responsible for a general rejection of the tenets
of Madhyamaka philosophy.
30
Presumably in some measure a result of the reception of Burnouf's
remarks, Candrakīrti's PSP was ignored for nearly the rest of the
century. In the mid-1890's, however, the manuscript that had been
delivered to Paris by Hodgson was, as luck would have it, finally
dusted off by the brilliant young Belgian scholar Louis de La Vallée
Poussin (1869-1938). De La Vallée Poussin undertook as his initial
project an analysis of the twenty-fourth chapter of the PsP, which
was published in 1897.2⁹ He subsequently, over the years 1903-1913,
painstakingly created a critical edition of the entire text, ³0 an edition
that would introduce and render accessible to modern scholarship
both Nāgārjuna's MMK and Candrakīrti's commentary on it, and that
would serve as the basis for all subsequent study of the two works.
The manuscript in Paris was one of a trio of manuscripts collated by
de La Vallée Poussin for his edition of the PsP: he sought out in
addition to the relatively poor quality Paris manuscript³¹ a manuscript
of the PSP that had been acquired by the Cambridge University
Library from Dr. Daniel Wright and another held by the Asiatic
Society of Bengal in Calcutta, which had also been received from
Hodgson. ³2 In the course of working with these manuscripts de La
Vallée Poussin discovered, as he asserts in the Avant Propos to his
edition, that all three were "copies médiocres d'un original qui ne
paraît pas avoir été irréprochable." Yet in spite of the scribal errors
32
29
L. de La Vallée Poussin, “Caturāryasatyaparikṣā,” in Mélanges Charles de Harlez,
1897, pp. 313-320.
Candra Dās and Pandit
30 I refer to his edition as PSP₁. The so-called "Calcutta edition" of 1894 by Śarat
imohan Vidyābhūṣaṇa was little more than a printed
version of the Calcutta manuscript of the PsP; see May 1959: 6. The PsP edition was
not de La Vallée Poussin's only project during these years: he also produced a
Sanskrit edition of Prajñākaramati's commentary on the Bodhicaryāvatāra (1901-
1912) and a Tibetan edition (1907-1912) and translation (1907, 1910, 1911) of
Candrakīrti's MABh.
31 Burnouf (1844: 559) remarks: “... et quoique le manuscrit soit fort incorrect, il est
facile de voir quelles sont les opinions de l'auteur primitif et de son commentateur."
32 For details see MacDonald 2000: 165 as well as infra Manuscript Description:
Paper Manuscripts (mss L, M and N).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
15
and lacunae shared by the manuscripts, de La Vallée Poussin man-
aged to create, with the aid of the Tibetan translation, a truly com-
mendable edition of both the MMK and the PSP which embeds and
explains it. The resultant utility of this first edition based on limited
material was-aside from de La Vallée Poussin's admirable skill as
an editor-in large part due to the quality of the Cambridge Uni-
versity Library manuscript. Of the sixteen manuscripts I consulted
for my Sanskrit edition of the first chapter of the PsP, fourteen of
which are paper manuscripts, the Cambridge manuscript (in the
present study designated "ms L"), copied in Nepal in A.D. 1781,
ranks as one of the four "best" paper manuscripts of the PsP. Its
errors, however, cause it to place last on my list of "best" paper
manuscripts. The problematic readings that de La Vallée Poussin was
not able to solve because of its corruptions and the corresponding and
further complicating readings in the Paris and the Calcutta
manuscripts mean that numerous passages in de La Vallée Poussin's
otherwise impressive edition stand in want of improvement.
As de La Vallée Poussin noticed early on in his editorial work on the
PSP, the Tibetan translation of the work often preserves equivalents
for readings lost from or corrupted in the three Sanskrit manuscripts
he collated for his edition. The colophon appended to the translation
reveals that Candrakīrti's work was rendered into Tibetan in
Kashmir, at the Ratnagupta monastery in Grong khyer dpe med
(probably Śrīnagar),33 by the Indian pandita and great logician
(mahātārkika) Mahasumati and the Tibetan translator Pa tshab nyi
ma grags.34 Tibetan sources record that Pa tshab was born in 1055,
travelled to Kashmir in his youth to devote himself to Buddhist
scholastic activities, and remained there for the next twenty-three
33 On the name Kha che’i grong khyer dpe med, see Naudou 1980: 208f. Naudou
(ibid., 210) writes, "Monasteries were numerous at Grong-khyer dpe-med, but their
identification proves very difficult. But, according to our information, the most
active monastery during the 11th century was the Ratnaguptavihāra (Rin-chen sbas-
pa), where sojourned the Tibetan Nyi-ma grags.”
34 On Pa tshab nyi ma grags's life and translations, see Naudou 1980: 212f., Erb
1997: 29 and n. 123 and 125, Lang 1990: 132-134. On Mahāsumati, see Naudou
1980: 230. On the PSP and MABh colophons and their importance for text-critical
work, see MacDonald 2015.16
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
35
years, after which he returned to his homeland and commenced
teaching. I estimate that the PsP translation was prepared sometime
during the last decade of the eleventh century. It was made in
reliance on a local Sanskrit manuscript, in all likelihood written in a
version of the Sarada script, the text of which, scribed possibly four
hundred years after the PSP was composed, was also not completely
free of the mistakes that result from repeated copying.36 One
presumes that it was his awareness of specific problems related to the
transmission of the text that inspired Pa tshab, after returning to Tibet
at the end of the eleventh century or the turn of the twelfth, to check
his Tibetan translation against a second Sanskrit manuscript located
in Lhasa that had been copied in "eastern Aparanta."37 Aided in this
collation work by the Kashmiri scholar Kanakavarman, he
corrected the translation and closed work on it. Manuscripts of the
38
35 The MABh colophon and other colophons to works translated by Pa tshab record
that these translations were made during the reign of the king 'Phags pa lha,
presumably an appellation for King Harṣadeva who held the throne from 1089-1101.
There are no references in the colophons to Harṣadeva's successor Uccala. Lang
(1990: 134) tentatively suggests placing Pa tshab in Kashmir between the years
1077/8 and 1101.
36
It has been interesting to learn that Pa tshab noted a couple of the variant readings
he encountered in his Kashmiri manuscript in his “Explanation of Difficult Points in
the Prasannapadā” (Tshig gsal ba'i dka' ba bshad pa [55a-88a]), which is found in
the bKa' gdams gsung 'bum (vol. eleven). My thanks to Kevin Vose and Chizuko
Yoshimizu for bringing the comments on the variants to my attention.
37 The geographical location of “eastern Aparānta” referred to in the colophon
remains uncertain. Aparānta is given variously as, e.g., the western seaboard of
India, the northern Końkana region, Konkana and Malabar, the central portion of
Bombay Province, and Western India in general (see Chaudhury 1969, ch. III; N.N.
Bhattacharyya, The Geographical Dictionary, Ancient and Early Medieval India,
Delhi: Munshiram Monoharlal, 1991, p. 70; Nundo Lal Dey, The Geographical
Dictionary of Ancient and Mediaeval India, Delhi: Oriental Books Reprint
Corporation, 3rd ed., 1971 [1st published 1927], p. 9; K.D. Bajpai, ed., The Geo-
graphical Encyclopaedia of Ancient and Medieval India, Part I, Varanasi: Indic
Academy, 1968, p. 29). The Blue Annals records that the Sanskrit manuscripts used
by Pa tshab and Kanakavarman to revise Pa tshab's translations came from yul dbus
(translated by Roerich as Magadha); see Erb 1997: 114, n. 125. Erb states, “d.h.
wohl auch aus Nālandā und Vikramaśīla.” He notes that according to Tāranātha,
Bhangala and Odivisa belong to eastern Aparānta.
38
On Kanakavarman, see Naudou 1980: 231ff.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
PSP translation then "free-floated" for the next two centuries or
entered small collections, until finally one of them was incorporated
into the Old Narthang Tanjur; the translation was printed in the four
block-print editions of the Tanjur relied on by modern scholars only
in the mid-eighteenth century. Only the Peking edition of the PSP
translation appears to have been available to de La Vallée Poussin
(he refers to it as the "Tandjour rouge"). Examination of Pa tshab's
and his collaborators' translation reveals that it is a meticulously
transposed composition that is often able to support unique readings
in the Sanskrit manuscripts, thus aiding our efforts to correct the
Sanskrit text, and that not infrequently contributes to our under-
standing of challenging argumentative and explanatory sections in
the PSP. On the other hand, the use of the Tibetan translation to edit
words and passages in the Sanskrit also calls for a great deal of care
and reflection owing to the fact that readings from two different
Sanskrit manuscripts are mirrored in it, and especially because one of
these manuscripts was contaminated with material not introduced by
Candrakīrti but rather interpolated by later scribes and scholars (see
infra Manuscript Description: Manuscript Relationships). De La
Vallée Poussin was not aware that the translators had appropriated
much of the extraneous material they found in the contaminated
manuscript, or that some of the contamination had also made its way
into his three manuscripts. He further did not realize that most of the
śāstra and sūtra passages cited by Candrakīrti were not rendered into
Tibetan by Pa tshab from the PsP Sanskrit but had rather been copied
directly from the Tibetan translations of the source texts available to
him at the end of the eleventh and/or early twelfth century.³⁹ De La
Vallée Poussin's edition, emended in reliance on the Tibetan
translation, thus includes material not intrinsic to the PsP and attests
a number of inappropriate changes to Sanskrit citations.
39
39
See MacDonald 2015.
17
A slightly reworked version of de La Vallée Poussin's edition was
published by P.L. Vaidya in 1960.40 Vaidya introduces his own
40
Vaidya (1960b: vii) states in the introduction to his edition: “Poussin's edition is
long out of print. I had the good fortune of studying this very work at his feet in
1921-22, and hence I thought it my duty to bring out a new edition with a number of18
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
emendations into the text established by de La Vallée Poussin,
attempting to address with them both problematic readings already
noted by de La Vallée Poussin and readings deemed by Vaidya
himself to be in need of change. While some of his emendations
succeed in improving the text, or suggest new avenues for
consideration, many, if not most, of his emendations for the first
chapter of the PSP cannot be accepted. Vaidya's decision to use only
de La Vallée Poussin's edition as his material basis, i.e., to forgo
consultation of any of the three manuscripts used by the previous
editor as well as the editions of the Tibetan translation, is partly
responsible for their unacceptability.42 A further contributing factor
was Vaidya's manner of dealing with the Tibetan readings supplied
in de La Vallée Poussin's annotation: although the extent to which
Vaidya has reflected on these Tibetan words and phrases remains
unclear to me, he has a tendency to accept, without consideration of
the possibility of mistranslation or rewording, and with no thought to
the translators' program, sometimes questionable individual
manuscript readings that the Tibetan appears to support. Definitely
disturbing is the Vaidya edition's integration of all of de La Vallée
Poussin's conjectures (in the original edition enclosed in square
brackets) with rarely an indication that the text in these cases is
additions and alterations. I have made use of additional material published since
then, and therefore I hope this edition will be more useful than the former to our
Indian scholars."
4¹ Cf., e.g., his silent emendation paraḥ (read: paras) for de La Vallée Poussin's
param at PsP₁ 34.6, a reading attested by the manuscripts but rejected by de La
Vallée Poussin. I count less than a dozen emendations to the MMK; his emendations
for MMK XIII.6 and XXII.8 are correct. Unfortunately, Vaidya usually emends
silently, and never gives the reasons for his choices.
42
Vaidya (1960b: vii) wrongly describes de La Vallée Poussin's manuscript basis,
claiming that he did not directly use the Calcutta manuscript and rather relied on Rao
Śarat Candra Dās and Pandit Harimohan Vidyābhūshaṇa's "edition" of the Calcutta
manuscript. S. Tripathi, the “editor" of the 1987 reprint, states in the edition's
Preface that no changes were made to Vaidya's original text because "nothing new"
regarding the PsP had appeared since the publication of the first edition in 1960.
Perhaps symptomatic of the poor exchange of information between east and west at
the time, Tripathi seems to have been unaware that de Jong had published his
important Textcritical Notes already in 1978, and that nine manuscripts of the PsP
were available by 1987.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
19
hypothetical and unsupported by the manuscripts. In addition to
revising the text of the previous edition, Vaidya changes its anno-
tation. He reports that he has "retained with some modifications" de
La Vallée Poussin's philological notes, dropping, for example,
Tibetan citations,43 but he does not mention that his modifications
involve further simplification in the form of expunging other valuable
material, such as numerous variant manuscript readings and de La
Vallée Poussin's comments on these. Unfortunately, in taking over de
La Vallée Poussin's notes Vaidya also repeats their errors, but more
seriously, he misreports many of the retained variant readings, as
well as their relationship to the Tibetan.44 The edition as a whole has
the further defect of containing a host of printing errors: dropped
akṣaras and words, sometimes entire sentences, are not uncommon,
and most pages are marred by one or two, often up to four, misprints.
I refer to Vaidya's edition only when his emendations contribute to
the discussion of a reading.
43
In the half-century following the publication of de La Vallée
Poussin's annotated Sanskrit edition, all twenty-seven chapters of the
Vaidya informs the reader in his Introduction that he has excised from the
annotation all Tibetan citations, including those of the MMK, but in many cases he
does preserve de La Vallée Poussin's references to instances where the Tibetan
confirms the Sanskrit or lacks an equivalent. Vaidya (1960b: vii) states: “The foot-
notes of Poussin containing Tibetan translation of Kārikās and of extracts of the
commentary have been omitted from this edition as they are no longer useful to
Sanskrit scholars. I do not, however, underrate the value of Poussin's edition, and of
extracts from Tibetan given by him, but once the purpose of checking the accuracy
of Sanskrit text is achieved, the value of Tibetan translations to Sanskrit pandits
becomes secondary."
L
44 Cf., e.g., his note for PSP₁ 6.2's emended vo that reports "Mss. bodhi vo which is
confirmed by T," when in fact de La Vallée Poussin notes the variant bodhi; his note
for PSP₁ 10.8's hrasvam pratītya hrasvam prāpya hrasvam apeksya, which reports "T
pratītya for apeksya," when in fact de La Vallée Poussin has noted that the Tibetan
reads hrasvam prāpya hrasvam pratītya hrasvam apekṣya; his note for PSP₁ 16.1's
praveśayan which reports “praveśayet for praveśayan,” when de La Vallée Poussin
has noted that the manuscripts read praveśayena. Most unhelpful is his use of the
abbreviation "P" for both "Paris" and "Poussin."20
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
PSP were translated into European languages.45 The translations were
undertaken by Stcherbatsky (chapters one and twenty-five; in Eng-
lish); May (chapters two to four, six to nine, eleven, twenty-three,
twenty-four, twenty-six and twenty-seven; in French); Schayer
(chapters five, ten, twelve to sixteen; in German); Lamotte (chapter
seventeen; in French); and de Jong (chapters eighteen to twenty-two;
in French).46 As de Jong has noted, the only scholar in this group to
have consulted a manuscript was Jacques May, who on the rare
occasion refers to the Paris manuscript used by de La Vallée Poussin
in order to correct the edition.47 Both de Jong and May recognized the
importance of the Tibetan translation, and included alongside their
French translations of the respective chapters editions of the Tibetan
made in reliance upon the Peking and Narthang editions of the text.
As might be expected, a good number of the problematic and mis-
leading passages in these European-language translations have their
source entirely in the faulty text-basis, i.e., de La Vallée Poussin's
edition. It was only with the discovery of a fourth manuscript of the
work by Giuseppe Tucci that serious text-critical work on the PSP
again became possible. De Jong, his interest in the text rekindled,
collated his wife's transcription of a photocopy of this manuscript
against de La Vallée Poussin's edition and compiled an extensive list
of variant readings for the entire PsP, together with suggestions for
emendations, and in 1978 published this as "Textcritical Notes on the
Prasannapadā." He published his findings for Nāgārjuna's kārikās in
a new MMK edition in 1977 but, despite being encouraged to,
refrained from preparing a new edition of the PSP on account of the
considerable amount of manuscript material, viz., the Paris,
Cambridge and Calcutta manuscripts, that would additionally have to
45
See May 1959: 7-10; de Jong 1978: 25. May's (1959: 6) critique of de La Vallée
Poussin's annotation to his edition (“Elle est en général correcte pour les kārikā et le
commentaire; mais les notes critiques sont peu explicites, parfois même sibyllines”)
may be intended as a footnote to de Jong's (1949: ix) praise of the "édition
copieusement annotée."
46 See Stcherbatsky 1927; May 1959; Schayer 1930 and 1931; Lamotte 1936; de
Jong 1949.
47 See de Jong 1978: 26 and May 1959: 6.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
21
be investigated for such a project. The fourth manuscript, a holding
of the Keshar Library in Kathmandu, has in fact proved to be one of
the most important manuscripts for the present study. It is a deceptive
manuscript in that its mess of senseless scribal errors gives the
impression that the manuscript is relatively useless as a witness, but
closer examination reveals that it preserves many readings that have
become corrupted in the other manuscripts; these new readings of the
Tucci manuscript (termed "R" by de Jong; referred to as "ms D" in
the present study) often tend to be supported by the Tibetan
translation.4
De Jong's reluctance to take on the task of consulting manuscripts
beyond the manuscript unearthed by Tucci was amplified when he
became aware of the existence of two more manuscripts of the PSP,
also from Nepal, which had been filmed by the Institute for
Advanced Studies of World Religions (IASWR).49 He nevertheless
acquired microfiche copies of the two new manuscripts in order to
compare their readings of difficult passages with the readings
supplied by de La Vallée Poussin on the basis of his manuscripts. Not
finding better readings in the two IASWR manuscripts, he concluded
that they must stem from the same original as the three used for de
La Vallée Poussin's edition, adding, however, that a more careful
study of these manuscripts would be required. The examination of
manuscripts undertaken for the present study confirms de Jong's
assessment of these two manuscripts: they are relatively unimportant
manuscripts, both proving to be of less value than de La Vallée
Poussin's Cambridge manuscript.
Three more manuscripts of the PSP, also of Nepalese origin, held by
the Tokyo University Library-increasing the number of Nepalese
paper manuscripts of the PsP to nine-were brought to the attention
of scholars by Akira Saito in his 1985 article "Textcritical Remarks
48 This manuscript, although littered with scribal errors, often has the distinction of
being the "best" of the four "best" paper manuscripts.
4⁹ For details, see de Jong 1978: 26. The two manuscripts are referred to in the
present study as ms G and ms K.22
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
9950
on the Mulamadhyamaka-kārikā as Cited in the Prasannapadā.
One of these manuscripts, termed "ms J" in the present study,
belongs to the group of the four “best” paper manuscripts of the PSP
manuscripts available to date. It descends from the same exemplar
that de La Vallée Poussin's Cambridge manuscript (= my ms L) does
and on occasion attests correct readings where the Cambridge
manuscript is marred by scribal error. I was able to locate another
five previously unknown paper manuscripts of the PsP through the
Nepal-German Manuscript Project (NGMPP), one of which bears
readings valuable enough to place it among the four "best" paper
manuscripts.51 After concluding my search I was informed of the
existence of still two more paper manuscripts, both of which,
however, are of no import for editing purposes.
52
While the coming to light of twelve53 paper manuscripts more than de
La Vallée Poussin had access to is reason enough for a re-editing of
the PSP, the discovery of two palm-leaf manuscripts of the work
veritably demands it. The first of the new finds is a Nepalese
manuscript kept in the Bodleian Library in Oxford that I estimate was
copied in the late twelfth or thirteenth century, thus possibly not
much more than a century after Mahāsumati and Pa tshab translated
the PsP in Kashmir; I refer to it as "ms P".54 It preserves numerous
readings that became spoiled in or lost to the PsP manuscript trad-
ition over the centuries of repeated copying, some of which support
emendations and conjectures made by de La Vallée Poussin, de Jong
and other scholars, others of which allow for further correction of
Candrakīrti's important commentary and the root text couched in it.
It should be mentioned that it was primarily on the basis of this
manuscript that I was able to emend over twenty kārikās of the
50 For details, see infra Manuscript Description: Paper Manuscripts. The manuscripts
are referred to in the present study as ms H, ms I and ms J.
51
I refer to this manuscript as ms B.
52
See infra Manuscript Description: Introduction and MacDonald 2008: 17f.
53 The manuscript whose first folios I saw as photocopies in Kyoto in 2005 is now
unlocatable and thus not counted here.
54 See infra Manuscript Description: Palm-leaf Manuscripts: Ms P. See also Kragh
2006: 36f.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
23
MMK.55 This palm-leaf manuscript, although incomplete (complete,
however, for the first chapter) and often badly damaged, is extremely
important because it is the only manuscript among the known extant
manuscripts of the PSP not to have been affected by the contamin-
ation that has entered the rest of the witnesses, and which also affects
the Tibetan translation. The second palm-leaf manuscript of the PSP
is the so-called Potala manuscript, first announced and described by
Yoshiyasu Yonezawa in 2005; I refer to it as "ms Q".56 This manu-
script, presumably also of Nepalese origin, is nearly complete (it is
missing one folio for the first chapter) and is very well preserved. It
contains text for the many lacunae in ms P and greatly aids in the
restoration of the PsP. Perhaps its cardinal relevance lies in its having
revealed itself to be the key to understanding many of the discrep-
ancies between ms P and the Tibetan translation, for without access
to its readings it would have been much more difficult to determine
that it (Q) bears extraneous material and to establish the influence of
its line on both the Tibetan translation and the paper manuscripts. My
work has also benefited from Yonezawa's diplomatic and critical
editions of the *LT, which, he estimates, belongs to the twelfth
century and which cites words and phrases from another early
manuscript of the PsP.57
In the years since the discovery of the additional manuscripts of the
PSP, readings attested by some of the new manuscripts have been
taken into consideration by scholars investigating the work.58 In
2001, Brian Galloway, who did not directly consult a manuscript,
published a new Sanskrit edition (and translation) of PsP chapter
thirteen that emends de La Vallée Poussin's text by taking reference
55 The emendations suggested in MacDonald 2007 have been incorporated into Ye
2011a.
56 See infra Manuscript Description: Palm-leaf Manuscripts: Ms Q; Yonezawa 2005a
and 2005b.
57 See Yonezawa 1999 and 2004, both of which focus on the first chapter of the PsP.
58 For instance, both William Ames, who translated PsP chapter sixteen in his 1982
University of Washington Masters thesis, and Paul Nietupski, who translated chapter
thirteen as an appendix to his 1996 article, relied on de Jong's "Textcritical Notes"
and on editions of the Tibetan translation.24
to de Jong's "Textcritical Notes."5⁹ The same year, Toshiyuki
Kishine published the first two of three installments of his new
Sanskrit edition of PsP chapter twenty-four, which consider the
readings as attested in eleven PsP paper manuscripts,60 but do not
refer to those in ms P (ms Q was unknown at the time). The most ex-
haustive philological project to date was undertaken by Ulrich
Timme Kragh, who in 2006 published a new edition and translation
of Psp chapter seventeen for MMK XVII.1-20, which is based on the
four "best" paper manuscripts utilized for the present study as well as
on ms P.61
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
A satisfactory interpretation of the ideas presented in the PsP's long
first chapter-it constitutes approximately one-sixth of the entire
PSP is of course contingent on the accuracy of the Sanskrit text, as
well as on a close understanding of Candrakīrti's Madhyamaka views
and his argumentation, and familiarity with the works and tenets of,
and the influences upon, those Candrakīrti portrays as his opponents.
It is well known that Stcherbatsky's free translation of the first
chapter of the PsP, besides being disadvantaged by problematic text
in de La Vallée Poussin's edition, suffers from Stcherbatsky's
intentional superimposition of Kantian and other European philo-
sophical views onto positions held by the Madhyamaka and logical-
epistemological schools, and as a result often grossly misrepresents
Candrakīrti's intent.62 Among others, de Jong has critiqued the
translation for this intrusion of foreign ideas. He states:63
63
Stcherbatsky's translation appeared in 1927 (The conception of
Buddhist Nirvāṇa, pp. 69-212). His work comprises the first
chapter which is by far the most difficult. One cannot but have
59
See Galloway 2001: 321-350.
60
See Kishine 2001a, 2001b, 2002, and Kragh 2006: 23.
6¹ See Kragh 2006. On my recommendation, Kragh excluded the ten witnesses that
stem from mss J and L. Kragh 2003 contains critical Sanskrit text for the entire
chapter.
62 See, e.g., Tuck 1990: 36-47.
De Jong 1981: 227.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
25
the greatest admiration for the way in which he translated it.
There are very few places where Stcherbatsky misunderstood
the Sanskrit text but his interpretation is sometimes marred by
a tendency to read into the text ideas which are not there.
Stcherbatsky even went so far as to make changes in the text in
order to bring it into line with his interpretation, as has been
pointed out by de La Vallée Poussin (Mélanges chinois et
bouddhiques I, 1932, p. 390, n. 1). A new English translation of
chapters I and 25 is therefore fully justified.
While Stcherbatsky's translation indeed deserves to be appreciated as
an impressive pioneering attempt that made aspects of the thought of
the demanding first chapter available for the first time to modern
scholars of Buddhism, it cannot be denied that he frequently mis-
understood the Sanskrit text, so that Candrakīrti's words, in addition
to being veiled by Kantian superimposition, etc., are often taken in
directions that have little or nothing to do with the argument or
explanation at hand.64 Tillemans is more to the point:65
In addition to the Japanese translation published in the 1940's
by Susumu Yamaguchi, we now possess a new translation of
Prasannapadā I into Japanese by Prof. Tanji. However, as for
translation into a European language, this remains a project
which urgently needs to be reundertaken, for the translation by
Stcherbatsky is exceedingly misleading, both because of its
outdated philosophical terminology and because of its
translational errors.
64 De Jong's statement that “[t]here are very few places where Stcherbatsky
misunderstood the Sanskrit text" probably has to be viewed in its context, i.e.,
Stcherbatsky's translation being intended as a point of contrast for Mervyn Sprung's
problematic 1979 translation of the first chapter of the PsP. It should also be
remarked that Stcherbatsky presented more literal translations of passages in the
notes to his translation, and these capture Candrakīrti's intent more often than the
free paraphrase. On Stcherbatsky's mode of translation, see Seyfort Ruegg 2002: 12.
65 Tillemans 1992: 315.26
The 1979 translation of the chapter by Mervyn Sprung, as de Jong
pointed out in his critique of Sprung's English translation of chapter
one and sixteen other chapters of the PsP ("Lucid Exposition of the
Middle Way: The Essential Chapters from the Prasannapadā of
Candrakīrti"), unfortunately did not manage to improve upon
Stcherbatsky's translation of the first chapter.66 His work, Sprung
states, however, is "not directed at Sanskritists who themselves have
access to the original and whose interest would be more in the
translation of technical terms and in the interpretation of the
Prasannapadā within Buddhist and Indian philosophy," but rather
aims to make the PsP available "to philosophers who read English."
With this goal in mind he therefore abridges or omits numerous
important passages from the chapter, justifying his decisions by
arguing that to include them "is to make access to the work for
contemporary readers difficult and discouraging."67 Sprung follows
Stcherbatsky's interpretations for most of the remaining challenging
passages, and even though he discards the blatant western philoso-
phical overlay, he introduces many new errors of interpretation and
translation. In referring to his primary material Sprung does mention
that he has viewed the Cambridge manuscript and briefly describes it,
but not interested in philological details, notes that in preparing his
translation he consulted neither it nor the Tibetan translation, and
relied solely on de La Vallée Poussin's edition."
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
In 1988, Cesare Rizzi published the small monograph "Candrakīrti,"
which deals with the PsP's first chapter. Rizzi does not translate the
chapter and rather paraphrases and briefly explains the thought of
selected passages, tending in general to follow Stcherbatsky's inter-
pretations. He omits the entire attack on Dignāga's epistemological
66 See de Jong 1981.
67 Sprung 1979: xii. For the list of passages Sprung abridged or omitted in his
translation of the first chapter, see ibid., xii-xiii.
68
Sprung (1979: x-xi) writes, “The manuscript I have seen, the one in Cambridge, is
in excellent condition but is replete with scribe's errors and, in Poussin's view, is not
as reliable as the Tibetan translation. None the less, I have throughout used only the
Sanskrit text as edited by Poussin, even though at many places the Tibetan text is
said to be clearer."PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
27
project. The paraphrased passages are minimally annotated, and on
account of translational/interpretational problems and the imprecision
of the paraphrase, the work, not contributing to an improved under-
standing of the chapter, has largely been ignored by me. Teruyoshi
Tanji's important Japanese translation of the entire first chapter of
the PSP also appeared in 1988.69 His "Prasannapada Madhyamaka-
vṛtti I" includes substantial philosophical and text-critical annotation,
in which Tanji takes into consideration the readings of the Tucci
manuscript noted by de Jong in his "Textcritical Notes" as well as
those of the two paper manuscripts filmed by the IASWR.70
Regrettably, I do not read Japanese and thus am not able to comment
on this work or any other Japanese translations of the PSP.
A partial translation of the first chapter of the PsP is presented in
Jeffrey Hopkins' "Meditation on Emptiness," published in 1983.
Hopkins translates the section of the chapter in which Candrakīrti
defends Buddhapālita's use of consequences (prasanga) to refute the
opponent's belief that things come into existence and critiques Bhã-
viveka's insistence on the use of inferences (svatantrānumāna) to
accomplish this.7¹ The basis for his translation, unlike the translations
of previous scholars which rely on de La Vallée Poussin's Sanskrit
edition, is the Tibetan translation of the PsP, in this case primarily as
it appears in the seventeenth-eighteenth century Tibetan dGe lugs pa
scholar 'Jam dbyangs bzhad pa's "Great Exposition of the Middle
Way,"72 in which the entire text of the defence and critique as found
6⁹ Two more translations of the entire first chapter of the PsP, by Megumu Honda
and Takeki Okuzumi, both in Japanese, were published in 1988. Susumu Yamaguchi
had earlier, in 1947, published a translation of the entire chapter. See Yotsuya 1999:
xiv and his bibliography. Shiro Matsumoto published a partial translation of the first
chapter in 1985. Yotsuya (1999) occasionally refers in his annotation to the
translation choices and interpretations of Tanji, Honda, Okuzumi and Yamaguchi.
70 See Yotsuya 1999: xiv.
71 See Hopkins 1983: 455-530.
72
Tibetan title: dBu ma 'jug pa’i mtha dpyod lung rigs gter mdzod zab don kun gsal
skal bzang 'jug ngogs.28
73
in the first chapter of the PSP is cited. The paragraphs on the ety-
mology of the compound pratītyasamutpāda (dependent-arising) are
presented in Hopkins' translation of the section on dependent-arising
in 'Jam dbyangs bzhad pa's "Great Exposition of Tenets."74 Hopkins
has corrected the citations of the Tibetan translation of the PsP in the
"Great Exposition of the Middle Way" in dependence on the Peking
edition of the translation.75 Although he translates the PSP citations
from the Tibetan, Hopkins has checked them against the Sanskrit of
de La Vallée Poussin's and Vaidya's editions and records major
discrepancies; he also refers to some of the emendations and com-
ments in de Jong's "Textcritical Notes." Hopkins' translations of
these sections of the first chapter substantially improve upon those of
the Western translators mentioned thus far, and the (Tibetan-source
based) comments which he intersperses between translated para-
graphs are often informative and illuminating. These same trans-
lations, however, on occasion suffer from a neglect of the Sanskrit
and/or reliance on problematic Tibetan representations of Sanskrit
passages. And even though it is true that Tibetan exegesis is some-
times able to clarify aspects of abstruse discussions within Indian
texts, it is well known that it has a tendency to superimpose later
conceptual and logical developments onto the debates of a different
time and context; as might be expected, Hopkins' translations of the
passages, and especially, given his sources, his comments on them,
are impressed with the dGe lugs pa stamp.
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
73 See Hopkins 1983: 813, n. 346; 818, n. 374; 823, n. 415. The argumentation of the
same section of the PSP has been paraphrased and explained by Peter della Santina
following the interpretation found in the dBu ma spyi ston composed by the
fifteenth-century Sa skya scholar bSod nams Sen ge; see della Santina 1986: 140-
169.
74 Tibetan title: Grub mtha’i rnam bshad rang gzhan grub mtha’ kun dang zab don
mchog tu gsal ba kun bzang zhing gi nyi ma lung rigs rgya mtsho skye dgu’i re ba
kun skong. See Hopkins 1983: 664-673.
75
See, e.g., Hopkins 1983: 835, n. 447; 836, n. 454. Hopkins (ibid., 818, n. 374)
states at the outset of his Part Five, chapter four that he has used the Peking edition
of the translation and the Tibetan Publishing House gSung rab gces btus dpar khang
edition of 1968.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
29
The textually most punctilious investigation of major passages of
Candrakīrti's first-chapter confrontation with Bhāviveka and the
translation of these passages that to date most clearly reflects Candra-
kīrti’s intent has been carried out by Kodo Yotsuya in "The Critique
of Svatantra Reasoning by Candrakīrti and Tsong-kha-pa," published
in 1999. Yotsuya is one of the few translators of the chapter to have
consulted Sanskrit manuscripts. For the selections from the Sanskrit
examined by him, he collated the three manuscripts held by the
Tokyo University Library, recording in his notes their variant
readings, along with the Tucci manuscript readings and emendations
made by de Jong in his "Textcritical Notes," references to readings in
the two manuscripts filmed by the IASWR documented in Tanji
1988, and the manuscript readings provided by de La Vallée Poussin
in the notes to his edition. The edition's Sanskrit text for the passages
Yotsuya translates are emended on the basis of the Tokyo manu-
scripts and the references to manuscript readings, and the Tibetan for
the same passages is presented and emended in reliance on the
Peking and Derge editions of the PsP translation; all cases of discrep-
ancy between the Sanskrit and the Tibetan are noted. Yotsuya's ana-
lysis of the demanding passages he has chosen to focus on is precise
and enlightening, and it has been a source of aid and inspiration for
my own translation of the section.
A translation of PsP chapter one that runs from Candrakīrti's citation
of MMK I.1 through the critiques of his opponents-thus including
the discussion on the etymology of pratītyasamutpāda and the refu-
tation of Bhāviveka-up to, but not including, the citation of MMK
I.2 (thus sixty-three pages in de La Vallée Poussin's edition) was
published by David Seyfort Ruegg in 2002 as the first half of the
monograph "Two Prolegomena to Madhyamaka Philosophy." Taking
de La Vallée Poussin's edition as his textual basis, Seyfort Ruegg
also refers to de Jong's "Textcritical Notes" and pays careful atten-
tion to the Tibetan translation, having consulted the readings in the
Peking, Derge and Narthang xylograph editions and the Golden
Manuscript. The translation is provided with learned annotation and
enables readers to gain a far clearer picture of Candrakīrti's con-
versations with his adversaries, his argumentation and agendas than
they could on the basis of Stcherbatsky's translation. Given the30
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
importance of Seyfort Ruegg's translation, I often attempt in my
annotation to note cases where my interpretation of Candrakīrti's or
the opponents' intent diverges from his, and to provide reasons for
my difference of opinion.
A further investigation and translation of a section of the first chapter
of the PSP requiring mention is Mark Siderits' 1981 article "The
Madhyamaka Critique of Epistemology," in which he presents and
discusses most of the passages constituting Candrakīrti's response to
the Naiyāyika critique of the Madhyamaka conclusion that things
have not arisen as well as Candrakīrti's extensive attack on Dignā-
ga's postulation of the object of perception as the particular charac-
teristic (svalakṣaṇa) and on Dignāga's etymology of pratyaksa.
Siderits' interest is primarily philosophical and he thus relies only on
Vaidya's edition and ignores the Tibetan. The translations of the
passages he presents are often problematic, and although he mis-
interprets the meaning of a number of these passages, his comments
as regards others are elucidative.76
This same section was translated in its entirety and richly annotated
by Dan Arnold in his 2005 article "Materials for a Madhyamika
Critique of Foundationalism: An Annotated Translation of Prasanna-
padā 55.11 to 75.13," and analyzed in his monograph "Buddhists,
Brahmins and Belief," also published in 2005. Arnold's translation is
based on de La Vallée Poussin's edition, and he presents in his notes
to his 2005 article the edition's text for each passage translated,
additionally including, where appropriate, variant readings from
Vaidya's edition, emendations proposed by de Jong in his "Text-
critical Notes," the relevant Tibetan (Derge), and/or comments made
by the author of the *LȚ. In reliance on this material, he occasionally
proposes emendations for the Sanskrit text. His translation as a whole
represents a fundamental improvement over that by Siderits, and
often provides carefully weighed and well-argued alternatives for the
translation choices and interpretations advanced by Seyfort Ruegg
for the same section. Given that it is Arnold's translation of this
76 A few passages from this section are also translated from Tibetan in Thurman
1991.31
section which comes closest to reflecting Candrakīrti's intent, I
deemed it necessary to consider it in some detail in my own anno-
tation to the segment, and thus note where I concur but also where I
understand the Sanskrit expression or argumentation slightly
differently, and attempt to substantiate as much as possible any
divergent interpretations.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
It goes without saying that my own understanding of the text and thus
my translation is greatly indebted to the work of nearly all of the
above scholars.
Miscellaneous
Notes to the translation that had become too bulky for the page for-
mat were transformed into appendices that appear at the end of the
translation.
I relied on de La Vallée Poussin's edition of the Tibetan of the
MABh for the MABh citations in the notes to my translation and was
made aware of Uryuzu and Nakazawa's 2012 MABh Tibetan edition
(MABhUN) only after my annotation had been completed. I have
nevertheless tried to record relevant variant readings from MABHUN
within brackets in my citations of de La Vallée Poussin's text.
Citations from the MMK rely on Ye 2011a. Siderits and Katsura's
2013 translation of the MMK arrived too late for in-depth considera-
tion and is thus rarely referred to in the translation notes.
All citations from Pāli texts appearing in the annotation of the trans-
lation are reproduced as they have been printed in the PTS editions;
no attempt has been made to regularize the sandhi.Manuscript Description
Introduction
The material relied upon for the establishment of the Sanskrit text of
the initial chapter of the PsP includes a microfilm copy of the palm-
leaf manuscript of the PsP conserved in the Bodleian Library,
Oxford, England, Dr. Yoshiyasu Yonezawa's (unpublished) hand-
copy of the first chapter of a palm-leaf manuscript of the PSP
previously, and perhaps still, kept in the Potala Palace in Lhasa,
Tibet, and microfilm copies and microfilm-derived paper photocopies
of fourteen paper manuscripts of the PsP preserved in various
libraries and collections. The fourteen paper manuscripts were
assigned, merely for the sake of convenience, the letters A through
N; the two palm-leaf manuscripts are represented, respectively, by P
and Q. Upon completion of the recording of variants for the first half
of the chapter, I was able to work out the stemma for the paper
manuscripts and to eliminate the manuscripts that only repeated and
added to the errors of the more reliable witnesses (see the Stemma
below). Ten paper manuscripts, namely, mss A, C, E, F, G, H, I, K,
M and N, were excluded at this point; their variants for the second
half of the chapter thus do not appear in the critical edition's
apparatus. The remaining four paper manuscripts, namely, mss B, D,
J and L, and the palm-leaf manuscripts P and Q were collated for the
second half of the chapter.
The existence of another paper manuscript of the PSP was brought to
my attention after I had collated A-N and P, but its variants have not
been added to the apparatus because it was quickly determined to be,
from a text-critical point of view, an insignificant descendant of ms J.34
This manuscript was filmed by the Nepal-German Manuscript
Preservation Project but recorded under a wrong title and as a result
came to light only during the cataloguing activities of the follow-up
Nepalese-German Manuscript Cataloguing Project.¹
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
In 2005 I was told that the Ōtani University Library possessed a
manuscript of the PsP but that it had not yet been catalogued. During
a visit to Kyoto in December of the same year, I was requested to
examine a photocopy of a few folios of the manuscript, and was able
to determine that it too was an unimportant descendant of ms J.² At
present there seems to be, however, no record of the manuscript in
the Ōtani University Library, and despite careful investigation none
of the scholars at Otani have been able to locate the manuscript in
either their own or other collections in Kyoto.³
¹ I am grateful to Dr. Dragomir Dimitrov who, during his tenure as Local Repre-
sentative of the Nepalese-German Manuscript Cataloguing Project and Director of
the Nepal Research Centre in Kathmandu, contacted me about the manuscript and
provided me with its catalogue information and a copy of it (the manuscript is briefly
mentioned in MacDonald 2008: 17f.). Manuscript details: It was filmed by the
Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project, but the date of filming was not
recorded (reel no. A 127/5). The manuscript was microfilmed for a second time on
Aug. 4, 1988 (reel no. A 1210/15). The title on the original index card was given as
Vainayasūtra. Script: Devanāgarī. Physical description: 206 folios; 34.5 x 12.5 cm.;
9 lines per folio. vainaya is written above the folio number in the upper left margin
of each verso; sūtra is written above the folio number in the lower right margin on
the versos. vi. sa. (for viṣaya sankhyā “subject number") 376 has been written by a
modern hand on the cover leaf. Colophon: same as the colophon of ms A (see
below), followed by śubham.
2 See my comments in MacDonald 2008: 16f.: "On a visit to Japan in December
2005, I was requested to examine the photocopy of a couple of folios from the
manuscript. Although the photocopy did not provide sufficient text for an exact
determination of the manuscript's place in the stemma, I was able to conclude that
this manuscript is, from the text-critical point of view, an unimportant descendant (at
least second generation, possibly a “great grandchild") of Ms. J. It therefore does not
need to be taken into consideration when editions of further chapters of the
Prasannapadā are made."
3 I am extremely grateful to Prof. Shobha Rani Dash of Ōtani University for her
repeated efforts to locate the manuscript. I also thank Dr. Xuezhu Li and Dr.
Mudagamuwe Maithrimurthi for their aid in the matter.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Palm-leaf Manuscripts
Ms P
35
From my own experience I know that bundles of Sanskrit
MSS. are scattered in Public and Private Libraries of
England without attracting any notice. On this account it
is possible that in Europe discoveries of important
Sanskrit works can still be made.4
- Theodor Aufrecht
The palm-leaf manuscript of the PSP designated for our purposes as
ms P was sold to the Bodleian Library in Oxford, England, in 1900
by Dr. A.F. Rudolf Hoernle. It escaped the notice of Louis de La
Vallée Poussin when he was collecting manuscripts to collate for his
edition of the PsP, which was published over the years 1903–1913 as
volume IV of the Bibliotheca Buddhica. The Bodleian manuscript,
although recorded in a detailed manner in Winternitz and Keith's
4 Quoted from Aufrecht’s (1962: iii) Introduction to his Catalogus Catalogorum.
5 Dr. Augustus Frederic Rudolf Hoernle (1841-1918) studied Sanskrit in London
under Theodor Goldstücker and obtained his Ph.D. from the University of Tübingen
in 1872. After serving as Professor of Sanskrit and Philosophy at Jay Narayan
College, Benares, as the Principal of the Cathedral Mission College in Calcutta (he
had been ordained in 1864 and originally posted by the Church Missionary Society
to Mirat, India) and later as the Principal of the Calcutta Madrasah, he retired in
1899 and returned to England, settling in Oxford. Ms P must have been among the
manuscripts he brought to England when he left India. He sold the Weber
manuscript to the Bodleian Library in 1902. Eighty manuscripts from another private
collection of his that consisted of a total of eighty-eight manuscripts (sixty Sanskrit,
twenty-five Prakrit and three Hindi, of which seven were palm leaf and eighty-one
paper) were sold to Otto Bayer of Erlangen in May of 1905 (or 1908?) and kept in
the Tübingen University Library; the other eight were sold the following August to
Otto Harrassowitz in Leipzig. Dr. Carola Roloff kindly provided me with a PDF of
the U. of Tübingen’s Hoernle handlist, in which he describes the manuscripts. On
Hoernle's life, see G.A. Grierson's "Obituary Notice" for Hoernle in The Journal of
the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland (1919), pp. 114-124 and
http://www.iranicaonline.org/articles/hoernle-augustus-frederic-rudolf.36
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
1905 "Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Bodleian Library,"
remained in a state of oblivion for most of the twentieth century, and
received mention, as far as I am aware, for the first time in a work
other than the library's catalogue when it was included in Vol. 3 of
"A Descriptive Bibliography of the Sanskrit Buddhist Literature"
edited by K. Tsukamoto, Y. Matsunaga, and H. Isoda, published in
1990.6
Entry number 1440 in the Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the
Bodleian Library reads as follows:
Candrakīrti's Madhyamakavṛtti, 14th cent. ?. Bought in 1900
from Dr. A.F.R. Hoernle. Kept in a cloth box. Size of box: 22
1/2 x 2 3/4 x 2 3/4 in. Size of leaf: 22 x 1 7/8 in. Material: Palm-
leaves, held together by two pieces of cardboard and a string
passing through two holes at the sides. No. of leaves: 80 remain
out of probably 115. (Dr. Hoernle says 180 out of 217, but this
is doubtful.) No. of columns: 3, separated by a blank space one
inch wide. Date: Dr. Hoernle assigns the Ms. to the first half of
the 14th cent. Perhaps it belongs rather to the end, cf. the
numerals with those of the Mss. of A.D. 1360, 1385, in
Bendall's Buddh. Sansk. Mss., plate V. The numerals for 89,
90, 100, agree most closely with those of no. 1693, ibid.
Character: Nepalese. Injuries: the end (perhaps two or three ff.)
is lost, and also ff. 1, 27-31, 33, one between 44 and 49, 52, 64-
82, 87, 92-93, 96, 108, 109, 112. The rest is miserably
mutilated.
My assessment of the manuscript as regards its state and date differs
slightly from that given in the Catalogue. The folio numbers of the
lost leaves should be corrected to: 1, 27-31, 33, 48, 52, 64-82, 87, 92,
95-96, 108-110, 113. Thirty-six leaves are missing; seventy-seven
have been preserved.
6
See Tsukamoto et al. 1990: 239, item 16. See also Kragh's (2006: 36f.) description
of P.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
37
All folios but the first, i.e., the title page (1r), and the beginning of
the text itself (1v), are preserved for the first chapter. The text on
both sides of each leaf has been written in three sections or
"columns" to allow for two empty rectangular spaces which contain
the perforation for the single string-holes after respectively text-
sections one and two. The seven lines per folio³ read continuously,
across the empty spaces. The first and third sections, far from being
"miserably mutilated" are, for the most part, remarkably well
preserved and clear to read. The second (that is, middle) section has
suffered breakage and worm damage to its lower part, with the result
that all rectos for this section are missing large parts of the final line,
with the damage sometimes extending as far up as, and including, the
fourth line, and all versos lack parts of the first line in the middle
section, being sometimes damaged as far down as their fourth line.
The damage on occasion extends into or occurs independently in the
first and third sections and there tends to affect the penultimate
and/or final lines of rectos and the first and/or second lines of versos.
The entire manuscript suffers from the damage just described.
Here and there on other areas of the folios the upper layers of the
palm leaf or fibres thereof have lifted and broken off, taking parts of
akṣaras with them. There are numerous worm-holes in the manu-
script, and it is sometimes difficult to distinguish between parts of
akṣaras, anusvāras and worm-holes. The worms have also eaten
across the surface of the folios, not only consuming akṣaras but
additionally leaving behind small trails and black marks that are
sometimes strikingly similar to elements of conjuncts and vowel
markers. These holes and marks, however, have not interfered
significantly with the reading of aksaras since it was usually
possible, once the microfilm of the manuscript was digitized and
7 Folio 14 has broken off after the first two-thirds of the front-side second "column";
the broken piece containing the last third of this second column and the third column
has been lost. Because of the breakage, part of the fifth line, and the sixth and
seventh lines within the partially preserved second column of 14r are also missing,
and correspondingly the first and second lines and part of the third line for this
column of 14v are missing.
8 Folio 9v contains 8 lines. Here and throughout I base the specifics of my remarks
on the folios containing the text of the first chapter.38
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
enhanced via Photoshop, to distinguish them from the manuscript's
ink. The akṣaras in areas darkened by water stains and smoke also
became more legible post-digitization.
Most of the side margins of the folios survived the passing of the
centuries. Even though some of the folios are missing the upper or
lower corners of these margins, the breakage has not affected many
of the akṣaras. Some of the akṣaras close to breakage are difficult to
read owing to fading, wear and/or damage due to breakage-related
fibre loss. The upper and lower margins of the folios also remain
fairly intact, although a few folios bear evidence of wear, which is
most pronounced near the outer edges where there is already some
breakage on the side margins. The wear does not usually affect the
first line of writing (on versos, the last) and only on folios 2 and 9,
which have lost most of their upper margins toward the outer edges,
have akşaras belonging to the ends of the first lines (and the last on
the versos) suffered damage to their upper (respectively lower) part.
The folios are numbered with akṣara-numerals placed in the center
left margins of versos.
The edges of the string-holes are intact, showing nearly no signs of
wear, thereby suggesting limited use of the manuscript.
Scribal Error and Correction
While ms P preserves many correct readings and contributes
substantially to establishing the text of the PSP, the mistakes common
to it and ms Q that cannot be dismissed as due to coincidence, as well
as the mistakes it shares with the paper manuscripts, betray the fact
that numerous errors were already embedded in manuscripts of the
lines leading to P. In a number of cases we do have in the preserved
sections of ms P a "best" manuscript but, as with all "best" manu-
scripts, the existence of errors demands a circumspect and prudent
approach with respect to its readings."
9 That this ought to be the approach in general as regards "best" manuscripts has
been emphasized in the oft-quoted remark by A. Housman in the preface to his 1903PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
39
11
Most of the scribal errors in the manuscript can be assigned to the
categories of error mentioned for the paper manuscripts (see below),
namely, omissions due to eyeskip, haplography, dittography, and
misreading of similar akṣaras.¹0 As in many Sanskrit manuscripts
that have been copied by Newar scribes, the akṣaras sa and sa easily
interchange, apparently because the separate members of the pair
were considered by the scribes as optional graphic forms." I have not
been able to determine the script of ms P's exemplar, or the script
used in the tradition prior to the employment of the old-Nepalese
script found in ms P,¹2 but certain errors presumably have their basis
in a misreading of similarly formed akṣaras in that script, and/or in
the copying of akṣaras from that script into an old-Nepalese
manuscript in ms P's ancestral lineage which resulted in a re-
interpretation of those akṣaras as genuine old-Nepalese akṣaras as,
for example, in the case of r of the Nepalese-script paper manuscripts
often being copied Nepalese-style into the Devanāgarī manuscripts
and then being interpreted as Devanāgarī n.
12
Ms P's scribe often noticed his mistakes upon committing them,
interrupted the process of copying to erase the erroneously written
edition of the first book of the Astronimicon of Manilius (at least in part a reaction to
the slavish methods of late Lachmannism): "To believe that wherever a best MS.
gives possible readings it gives true readings, and that only where it gives impossible
readings does it give false readings, is to believe that an incompetent editor is the
darling of Providence, which has given its angels charge over him lest at any time
his sloth and folly should produce their natural results and incur their appropriate
penalty. Chance and the common course of nature will not bring it to pass that the
readings of a MS. are right wherever they are possible and impossible wherever they
are wrong: that needs divine intervention ..." (quoted in Greetham 1992: 323 and
Tanselle 1990: 299).
10 Metathesis occurs very rarely in the manuscript.
¹1 On this point and other changes which can occur to akṣaras and words when
Newari-speaking scribes, copying Sanskrit texts, apply Newari spellings to words
that have been borrowed from Sanskrit and therefore already exist as part of the
Newari language, see Brough 1996.
12 Although Nepalese script is often called "Nevārī script" (alternatively, "Newari")
in catalogues and manuscript descriptions, the term is problematic, given that the
differentiation, indeed politically motivated contrasting of “Nevārī” and “Nepālī”
arose only with the Shah dynasty. I therefore refer to the script as “Nepalese” except
when reproducing the terminology of previous authors.40
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
vowel markers or single akṣaras, and wrote the correct form over the
erasure. In some instances he erased the erroneous akṣara and wrote
its correct form only after the erasure space. On more than a few
occasions he left out, often due to an eyeskip, a number of akṣaras
within a word or compound but, upon noticing the omission, he
returned to the point of error, erased the akṣaras in the immediate
environs on the concerned line and then wrote, in smaller, tighter
akṣaras so as to fit everything in, the akṣaras he had just erased and
the previously omitted akṣaras, i.e., the correct text.
A proofreader checked the manuscript after ms P's scribe had
completed his work. He wrote his corrections in a thinner, less
pleasing hand, a hand in which the akşara-element t betrays his
native or favoured script as a form of proto-Bengālī. The corrections
were written in the upper and lower margins of the folios directly
above or below the section in which the error occurred, with the line
the correction belonged to indicated by a line number next to the
correction. kakapadas are rarely employed as additional markers at
the point of insertion. On a couple of occasions the proofreader wrote
his correction in the space between the folio sections or "columns"
directly beside the line containing the error, and thus in these
instances did not need to add a line number to the correction. The
original scribe subsequently took up the manuscript again, erased his
errors, added the corrections, and, having done so, though it is often
difficult to distinguish between the proofreader's thin hand and light
erasure of it, erased some, but not all, of the marginal corrections.
Ms P, like ms Q, bears evidence of not only scribal lapses but also
determined change to its text. The changes are most evident in a few
of the verses of the MMK as transmitted by ms P. The fact that the
proofreader does not indicate that the modified or added words in P's
kārikās are incorrect by recording in the margin a different reading
found in the exemplar strongly suggests that these "improvements"
were already in the exemplar used by P's scribe. Were P's scribe to
have made the changes himself, it would have to be assumed that he
sat with the proofreader as the latter compared P against the
exemplar, carefully checking each discrepancy the proofreader
discovered, allowing the proofreader to record in the margin only the
corrections for erroneously copied words, restraining him fromPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
41
recording the exemplar's reading whenever the discrepancy was one
of his "improvements"; a rather unlikely scenario, not the least
because P's scribe could have made his corrections on the spot when
he sat with the proofreader and would not have needed the
proofreader to write the exemplar's reading, together with the
number of the line in P requiring correction, in the margin. Less
hypothetical support for the assumption that the scribe of ms P
merely copied changes already incorporated into the text can be
found in P's version of MMK II.17ab, where P's scribe, apparently
on account of an eyeskip, writes the half-verse na tiṣṭhati gamyamā-
nān na gatān nāgatād api (as correctly presented in PsP₁) as na
tiṣṭhati gamyamāna (string-hole) n na gatād api. The proofreader
notices the inconsistency with the exemplar and writes tvān na gatā
below the string-hole and squeezes a thin vertical line between ms
P's scribe's akṣaras na and ga in order to correct na gatād api to
nāgatād api. When P's scribe returns to the text, he erases his
original na tiṣṭhati gamyamāna, replaces it with na tiṣṭhati gamya-
mānatvān na gatā, and erases the proofreader's correction, so that the
half-verse now reads na tiṣṭhati gamyamānatvān na gatān nāgatād
api. The grammatically correct form gamyamanatvān discovered by
the proofreader in the exemplar (the individual responsible for the
change obviously felt a reason was needed) adds, however, an
unwanted syllable to the half-verse. This modification is
representative of one of the changes introduced to the handful of
modified kārikās in ms P: the change is incorporated without regard
for the metre, but does has some thought behind it, deviant though it
may be from the intended logic of the original karikā.
It is certain that the individual who altered the MMK's text knew the
grammatical rules of Sanskrit (he always applies correct sandhi) and,
judging from the modifications he makes, it is not unreasonable to
assume that he was fairly proficient in Sanskrit and comprehended
much of the text. In some cases, a superficial understanding of the
argumentation inspired the slight modification of a kārikā; in others,
the change was made in reliance on wording in Candrakīrti's
commentary. Although it would be culturally and contextually
inappropriate to regard the new readings this individual brings to the
manuscript as deriving from what a scholar of Latin textual criticism42
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
has described as Western medieval scribes" "worst virtue," namely, a
"pernicious desire to do good,"¹3 certainly the individual responsible
for the changes to the MMK was not an uninvolved copyist/reader,
and must have considered his revisions to be restoring lost readings
and correcting errors that had crept into the text.¹4
14
On ms P as a contaminated manuscript, see below, Manuscript
Relationships.
Script, Numerals and Date
The Bodleian Library Catalogue's description for ms P states that
Hoernle's assignment of the manuscript to the first half of the
fourteenth century may need to be revised and the date moved
forward, on the basis of the numerals written in its margins, to the
second half of the fourteenth century. The manuscript is, however, in
my opinion, even older than Hoernle judged it to be, and more likely
belongs to the late-twelfth or thirteenth century. The script, as stated,
is old Nepalese; it is written in the Nepalese hooked style, termed
such on account of the small, right-curving hook added to the top of
akṣaras. ¹5 This style, according to Bendall, came into fashion in the
15
13 James Willis (1972: 3), as quoted in Greetham 1992: 49. In Willis' opinion, most
medieval scribes were "not wildly ignorant of Latin nor deeply versed" and therefore
as scribes "very dangerous."
14
¹4 It is certainly not impossible that this individual or others did correct other errors
that had entered the text. A developed tradition of textual criticism existed in India;
see, e.g., Sarma 1982; von Hinüber 2000: 25f. Although most of the editing involved
silent correction, commentators and editors sometimes recorded variant readings,
and were aware of errors arising from similarity of akṣaras; note, e.g.,
Vallabhadeva's comment on the word prasama in Meghadhūta I.2: kecit tu
śakārathakārayor lipisārupyamohāt prathama iti ūcuḥ | katham katham api caitam
evārtham pratipannāḥ | (quoted in Sarma 1982: 287; von Hinüber 2000: 25). Sarma
(ibid., 288) records an anonymous author's biting versification of his view of poor
editors: sukavivacasi pāṭhān anyathākṛtya mohād rasagatim avadhūya prauḍham
artham vihāya| vibudhavarasamāje vyākriyākāmukānāṁ gurukulavimukhānāṇ
dhṛṣṭatāyai namo 'stu ||.
15 See Bendall 1992: xxiii. Bühler (1896: 58 [Fleet 1904: 59]), in his description of
Proto-Bengālī, writes: “Unter den in das spätere Bengali nicht übergegangenen
Eigentümlichkeiten, welche unsere drei Specimina zeigen, sind die kleinen DreieckePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
43
twelfth century; the earliest manuscript in the Cambridge Library
collection reported on by Bendall that can be ascertained to be in the
hooked style bears the date, or rather the Nepalese date equivalent to,
A.D. 1165. I am aware of two instances of the script from earlier in
the twelfth century, viz., in manuscripts dated A.D. 1135 and c. A.D.
1128.¹6 Bendall's study revealed that the hooked form took over as
the general style in the thirteenth century, was employed at least half
the time (as opposed to the style with horizontal lines topping the
akṣaras) in the manuscripts of the fourteenth century, and remained
the popular style in the fifteenth.¹7 It quickly went out of vogue,
however, and is not found in manuscripts of the sixteenth century.
mit der unteren halbrunden Seite und die ‘nepalesischen Haken' links an den Spitzen
verschiedener Buchstaben die auffälligsten und wichtigsten... Vergleicht man noch
die Tarpan-Dighi-Inschrift des Lakṣamaṇasena, in der die Dreiecke und Haken
häufig wechseln, so ist es klar, dass der 'nepalesische Haken' cursiv aus dem
Dreieck entwickelt ist. Das Dreieck selbst ist aber eine Modification für den
Deckstrich mit darunter stehendem Halbkreise, wie er sich mitunter in den
ornamentalen Inschriften aus Nord- und Centralindien findet." Continuing on to
discuss the Nepalese hook type, he adds (ibid., 59): “Nach den obigen Darlegungen
über das Vorkommen der Haken in Bengal-Inschriften des 12. Jahrh. und über ihren
Ursprung kann es nicht zweifelhaft sein, dass die Einführung dieser Modification der
Deckstriche in Nepal dem Einflusse des benachbarten Bengalen zuzuschreiben ist,
der, wie BENDALL erkannt hat, auch in andern Punkten bemerkbar ist."
Renou and Filliozat (1953: 679) refer to the style as "vartula": "La convexité
supérieure de ce crochet donne un aspect globuleux aux caractères qui sont alors dits
vartula ‘ronds’ (pl. écr. p. 693).” The script is also termed Bhujimmol by Nepalese
paleographers; the script in ms P is in many aspects similar to but is clearly older
than what is presented as Bhujimmol script in Hemraj Śākya’s Nepāla lipi-sangraha
and Nepāla lipi-prakāśa.
¹6 The Nepalese hooked style is found in a Pañcarakṣā manuscript from Year 53 of
Rāmapāla's reign (c. A.D. 1128), held by the National Museum, New Delhi (Acc.
No. 67.560), and in a Pañcarakṣā manuscript written in Kathmandu in NS 255 (=
A.D. 1135), now housed in the San Diego Museum of Art, formerly Edwin Binney
3rd Collection (Acc. No. 1990:156). On the Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā manuscript
written in this style and whose presumably copied colophon states that it was written
during the reign of Vigrahapāla III (A.D. 1051-1075), see Allinger 2012.
17 Bendall, however, contradicts himself in his remarks on the styles of the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. He initially asserts (1992: xxiii), “in the XIVth,
however, we find the ordinary horizontal and the hooked tops in about an equal
number of cases; in the XVth century there is again a decided preponderance of the
hooked form ...", whereas a few pages later he writes (xxix), “Thus in the XIVth
century about one third of the MSS. have letters with straight tops, and in the next44
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
It should be emphasized that any discussion at this point in time of
old Nepalese script, inclusive of its hooked phase, must remain
tentative and subject to revision, for much more research is required
before we will be able to speak with any certitude about the
development of the script, its historical and regional changes, and so
forth. While commendable as valuable and pioneering preliminary
studies, the analyses that have been undertaken have focussed on
minimal raw material.18 Given this situation, attempts at relative
dating of Nepalese manuscripts on the basis of their paleography
should be regarded as, if not premature, clearly provisional.¹9 This
stated, I would nonetheless cautiously argue, in reliance on the
previous studies, for a late-twelfth- or thirteenth-century date for ms
P, that is, for a date earlier than either Hoernle or Winternitz and
century we find nearly the same proportion." I have not been able to ascertain which
assessment is correct.
18 Bendall, whose paleographical study tends to be the primary work relied on both
by earlier scholars (Bühler [1896: 59] quite naturally takes Bendall's “sorgfältige
Untersuchung über die MSS. aus Nepal" as his authority) and by modern scholars,
bases his conclusions concerning the development of Nepalese script on, e.g., a mere
six manuscripts from the eleventh century, six from the twelfth century, of which the
dates of two are uncertain, and eight from the thirteenth, of which the exact decade
of two are uncertain. Concerning manuscripts from the sixteenth century, Bendall
(1992: xxxi) writes, "Dated MSS. of the XVI century are almost too scarce to afford
a basis for generalization, as we possess only five examples," a conclusion we might
be justified in applying to many of the generalizations made by Bendall on the basis
of the manuscripts of the previous centuries.
19 L. Sander (1968: 165) asserts, “Es genügt nicht, nur nach für eine bestimmte
Epoche als typisch angesehenen Buchstaben in einem Schriftstück zu suchen und es
danach in ein Schriftsystem einzugliedern” and goes on to stress the importance of
awareness of local styles that may call for the assignment of manuscripts exhibiting
them to a different relative or absolute chronology. Greetham (1992: 222), referring
to Western handwriting, asserts that any conclusions regarding dating by means of
other dated manuscripts must be tempered with the knowledge that “[t]he method of
comparative dating by fixed standards may occasionally cause problems: for
example, a conservative manuscript might retain forms (orthographic or linguistic)
which could make it appear to be very much earlier than it is; scribes might move
from one area to another, or reach an advanced age while still writing in the style of
their youth and birthplace."
See, for comparative purposes, the introductory paragraph to the chapter section
"Dating by Paleography” in Greetham (1992: 221) where it is stated that cycles of
imitation and repetition, and the idiosyncrasies of scribes make relative dating in the
Western tradition "hazardous at best."PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
45
Keith assigned it. A few general remarks will have to suffice in
support of the claim.
20
The manuscript bears a number of archaic forms of Nepalese akṣaras
that are commonly found, for example, in the manuscripts of the
twelfth century discussed by Bendall, but that have been or are being
replaced by newer forms by the second half of the thirteenth.2⁰ In
some cases, the newer forms appear alongside these more archaic
forms, indicating that the script was in a state of transition.²¹ As
regards a terminus a quo, it can be noted that initial e appears in ms P
in the new open form, similar to Bengālī e. According to Bendall's
charts, this form was appropriated in the latter part of the twelfth
century, and does not appear in earlier manuscripts. I have found the
same new form, however, in the two hooked-style manuscripts dating
from c. A.D. 1128 and A.D. 1135.22 Ms P's akṣara tha remains in its
20 See Bendall 1992: xxvii-xxix and his appended Table of Letters, and also Bühler
1896, Table 6a. For non-date-oriented tables which allow for easy, but much
simplified, comparison of the hooked form, modern Nepalese, Bengālī, etc., see
Renou and Filliozat 1953: 693-695.
21 For example, Oskar von Hinüber (1991: 8), discussing the script of an ancient
Vinaya fragment, writes, “... the Vinaya fragment has been copied obviously
during a transitionary period from one type of script to another, since alternative
forms of certain akṣaras appear side by side in the same manuscript. This can be
observed also elsewhere e.g. at the time, when the younger proto-śāradā replaces the
earlier round Gilgit script. Here the old tripartite ya continues to be used in
combination with certain vowels, while the more recent form of that akṣara occurs
as well." That such periods of transition may vary for individual akṣaras can be
illustrated by comparing the relatively quick transition, apparently not involving an
over-lapping of forms, from archaic initial e to the precursor of the modern Nepalese
form during the twelfth century with the drawn-out change-over from archaic bha to
modern Nepalese bha that extends from the twelfth into the fifteenth century. The
mere fact that our script is in a process of transition does not necessarily help in
assigning the manuscript to a certain century since the script was transforming in
one way or another during the entire three and a half century duration of the hooked
style, but conclusions regarding dating, tentative as they must remain until more
paleographical research regarding old Nepalese is done, can be drawn on the basis of
the measure of development of individual akṣaras and the relationship of this
development to that of other akşaras.
22 Respectively the Pañcarakṣā manuscript from Year 53 of Rāmapāla’s reign (c.
A.D. 1128) and the Pañcarakṣā manuscript written in Kathmandu in NS 255 (= A.D.
1135). See n. 16.46
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
early form and on occasion appears in an even more archaic form.
Based on the sparse information in Bendall's charts, tha would occur
in its later form only from the fourteenth century on in Nepalese
manuscripts (this form can be evidenced already in the late eleventh
century in proto-Bengālī and may have had an earlier influence on
writing in Nepal).2³ dha appears predominantly in its archaic form
resembling the modern Devanāgarī pa²4 but is also occasionally to be
seen in its open-top form, an anticipation of the modern Nepalese-
script dha, which can be found already in a few manuscripts of the
late twelfth century25 and, sometimes side by side with the archaic
form, in the majority of manuscripts of the latter half of the
thirteenth.26 P's bha occurs almost consistently in the older form; I
have been able to locate only a few occurrences of the modern form.
By the late twelfth century both the archaic and the modern form are
being used together alternately in manuscripts, a practice that
continues in the thirteenth. The archaic śa, replaced by the modern
Nepalese sa in the thirteenth century,27 appears in
approximately half the time. sa usually bears the older form that is
often difficult to distinguish from ma, but is also represented by the
newer form.
ms P
23 See Bühler 1896: 57. See also Table V, C. XXII for this new development for tha
(and dha) by A.D. 1200 in north India.
24 Bühler (1896: 57) describes the Śāradā dha similarly: “dha, das oben abgeplattet
und unten so breit ist, dass es einem Devanāgarī pa gleicht.” This same form is to be
found in Bendall's manuscripts 1644 (A.D. 1205), 1706.1 and 2 (1261? and 1279)
but does not appear in his manuscripts of the fourteenth century.
25
For this open-top form, see Bendall's Table of Letters, ms. 1693 (A.D. 1165), etc.
Bendall (1992: xxvii) further refers to a form of dha found in ms. 1657 (A.D. 1199)
and ms. 1691.2 (A.D. 1179) that represents the ition from the archaic form to
the open-top, but not yet modern, form of dha; this specific form is not found in ms
P.
26 Bendall (1992: xxviii) refers to two manuscripts written in A.D. 1276 and one
written in A.D. 1278 which bear the later, open-topped form of dha; one of the
manuscripts dated 1276 and the manuscript dated 1278 bear in addition to the newer
dha the archaic form of dha. One also finds the new open-topped dha in the British
Museum manuscript no. 1439, dated 1286; see Bühler's Table VI, C. XII.
27 Bendall (1992: xxv) records that a manuscript from A.D. 1065 presents the first
example of the modern Nepalese sa.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
47
On the basis of the above, and supported by the other archaic
conjunct formations that occur in the script, it seems reasonable to
place ms P in the late twelfth or thirteenth century. Paleographical
specifics include prescript r conjoined with tta, ma, ya and va
(superscript r is alternatively added to these akṣaras);28 alternative
forms of medial vowels, viz., two forms of medial ā, four of e, five of
o, and three of ai; medial ū formed as two mirrored right angles
joined to the centre-right of the consonant akṣara, i.e., a short
horizontal line attached to a longer upward-extending vertical above
a short horizontal line attached to a longer downward-extending
vertical line (predominantly used with r, śr, and br); and stylized
final m plus virāma.2⁹
The akṣara-numerals employed in ms P (termed "letter-numerals" by
Bendall to distinguish them from "figure-numerals," i.e., numbers
from the decimal system) also seem to point to a date earlier than that
assigned by Winternitz and Keith, and I fail to see that the specific
records in Bendall's charts would support their estimate of a late-
fourteenth-century date. They assert that the akṣara-numerals in the
Cambridge manuscripts dating from A.D. 1360 and 1385 best
correspond with the akṣara-numerals in ms P, but in many cases this
statement is simply erroneous. Only for the numbers 12 and 13, and
then 102 and 103, does ms P attest, as part of these numbers, the
akṣaras representing 2 and 3, viz., dvi and tri,30 as found in the
manuscripts dating from A.D. 1360 and 1385; for all other instances
of 1, 2 or 3, the forms found in the older manuscripts are used. The 2
and 3 of the first two folios of ms P are also written in the old style,
28 The same prescript r occurs in a Nepalese manuscript dated 1119 described in
Pant 2000: 100f., in the previously mentioned Pañcarakṣā manuscript from Year 53
of Rāmapāla's reign (c. A.D. 1128), and in the Pañcarakṣā manuscript written in
Kathmandu in NS 255 (= A.D. 1135).
29 This stylized m-virāma has also been described as a type of anusvāra. In ms P,
where it is written as a small circle with a stroke beneath it which slopes downward
to the right, it is only used in final position, never within a word, and only at the end
of a sentence. It is clearly understood by P's scribe as a stylized m-virāma, because it
is used alternatively with a miniature m with a sloping line / virāma beneath it. I take
the stylized m-virāma in ms P to be a development of the miniature m-virāma.
30
dvi and tri already appear in the manuscripts dated A.D. 1165 and 1205.48
and the form of 1 found in the two manuscripts from the fourteenth
century does not appear anywhere in ms P. The akṣara-numeral for 4
corresponds to that of manuscripts from the years A.D. 1008, 1065,
1139 and 1165, yet is also close to that of the A.D. 1205 and 1385
manuscripts. The akṣara-numeral for 5 resembles that from A.D.
1205, but shows also similarity with that from 1385; it is different
from the akṣara-numeral for 5 attested in the A.D. 1360 ms. The
akṣara-numeral for 6 can be seen to correspond with that from the
years A.D. 1008, 1065, 1139, 1165, and 1205, less with that from
A.D. 1360, and not with that from A.D. 1385. The aksara-numeral
for 7 has unique features not found in Bendall's charts, taking a form
between that of the aksara-numeral for 7 of A.D. 1165 and 1205; it
can at times also be compared to (were it not for its straight
horizontal top) that of A.D. 1360. The akṣara-numeral for 8
compares to that of A.D. 1360 but has a much longer tail; the same
form, however, can already be seen in the manuscripts from A.D.
1008, 1065 and 1139. The akṣara-numeral for 9 is in a form between
that of A.D. 1205 and that of 1385, and is completely different from
that of A.D. 1360. The akṣara-numeral for 10, appearing as the
akṣara-numeral for 9 with a small circle for zero under it, corres-
ponds with that of A.D. 1205 but not with that of the manuscripts
from the 1300s. The aksara-numeral for 20 is best represented by the
forms of the akṣara-numeral from the eleventh and twelfth centuries,
and is different from those of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.
The akṣara-numeral for 30, with a straight horizontal line topping it,
corresponds with the akṣara numeral from A.D. 1165. The akṣara-
numeral for 40 is presented in the older form shown for the
manuscripts of the eleventh and twelfth centuries. The akṣara-
numeral for 50 does not change much over the centuries and can be
compared to the 50s of the eleventh through fourteenth centuries. The
akṣara-numeral for 60 again has unique features and, although it is
similar to akṣaras of both the eleventh and fourteenth centuries,
cannot be said to correspond more with one than another. The folios
for the 70s have been lost. The akṣara-numeral for 80 is in the form
presented in the majority of the manuscripts from the eleventh and
twelfth centuries and in the A.D. 1360 ms, but is different from that
in the A.D. 1385 ms. The akṣara-numeral for 90 compares to that
from A.D. 1165 and 1360, not to that from A.D. 1385. 100 also
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTIONPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
49
exhibits unique features, but compares somewhat to that of A.D.
1165 and 1360, and much less to that of A.D. 1385.
On the basis of Bendall's charts, the latter half of the fourteenth
century is too late a date for ms P.31 Unfortunately, Bendall did not
have access to manuscripts dating from the first half of the fourteenth
century that employed akṣara-numerals. There is, however, still
enough evidence from his akṣara-numeral charts to support a late-
twelfth- or thirteenth-century date for P. The introduction of dvi and
tri into the numbers 12 and 13 appears to indicate that the manuscript
likely does not predate the latter half of the twelfth century, a
conclusion also arrived at during the examination of the akṣara-
numerals. That tṛ (= 5) has devolved to a rather grotesque form of hṛ
suggests again a late-twelfth-century terminus a quo or, according to
Bendall's charts, a thirteenth-century date. phra (= 6) has lost the
form it had in the tenth and early eleventh centuries but has not yet
transformed into the bhra it becomes by the later fourteenth century;
it retains the straight lines shown in the intermediary form of the late
1100s and early 1200s. gra (= 7) has gained the extra vertical stroke
first evidenced in the A.D. 1165 ms, and is presented at times with
the wavy version of this stroke that appears by the early 1200s; it
retains the straight lines in the rest of the akṣara and so has not
reached the late-fourteenth-century stage in which it degenerates into
the akṣara ña, but it does attest one or two short horizontal lines
connecting the extra vertical line to the rest of the aksara, thus
certainly anticipating the change into ña. A later form of 8 occurs in
ms P, but at the same time we find that it retains the old form of 20,
already replaced in the A.D. 1205 manuscript. Although, as stated,
any conclusion regarding the date on the basis of a comparison with
the few manuscripts examined by Bendall has to be a tentative one,
once again the late 1100s or 1200s would seem the most attractive
years in which to place ms P.
31
See also the "System of Figures in Mss. Discovered" in R. Sāṁkṛtyāyana's article
"Second Search of Sanskrit Palm-Leaf Mss. in Tibet" in the Journal of the Bihar and
Orissa Research Society 23 (1937) and Bühler 1896: Tafel IX (“Zahlzeichen").
These charts do not supply additional information for the dating of ms P.50
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
This analysis, which demonstrates that the manuscript bears signs of
being at least a century earlier than Winternitz and Keith's estimate,
is supported by the learned opinion of Dr. Mahes Raj Pant, an expert
in Nepalese paleography. Curious to know if a second opinion would
support my conclusions, I sent photocopies of a few folios of ms P to
Kathmandu to be examined by Dr. Pant. He informed me that ms P's
script is more recent than that of a manuscript of the Amarakośa
dating from A.D. 1119,³2 but definitely too archaic to be from the
fourteenth century, and on the basis of the folios sent suggested, in
agreement with my general estimate, the thirteenth century as the
most probable time period. At a later meeting in Vienna during which
we compared more digitized images of ms P with Pant's photograph
of a twelfth-century Nepalese inscription, he noted that the archaisms
in ms P's script indeed indicate that the manuscript could have been
written in the latter half of the twelfth century.
Ms Q
Ms Q is valuable for the reconstitution of the text of the PsP not only
because it preserves many reliable readings but because it has
suffered minimal damage, and lacks only four folios. It attests text
for many of ms P's missing folios and numerous damaged passages.
Ms Q is regrettably at this point in time not available to the larger
scholarly community; I do not know if it has been microfilmed. In
2001, while on a trip to Lhasa with a team of scholars from Taishō
University, Dr. Yoshiyasu Yonezawa was allowed to view the
manuscript, which was at that point in time kept in the Potala Palace,
and granted permission to make a hand-copy of its text. Dr.
Yonezawa kindly provided me with a copy of his hand-copy of ms
Q's first chapter of the PSP when I was on a research stay in Japan in
2011.33 In addition to the text of ms Q, the hand-copy records all
32
A few folios of the manuscript are reproduced in Pant 2000: 61-66.
33
All of my comments about the manuscript and its readings are based on the hand-
copy of Q's first chapter, on the brief description of Q in Yonezawa 2005b, and on
personal communication with Dr. Yonezawa. I do not have access to other chaptersPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
damage to the manuscript, as well as unclear aksaras, the scribe's
deletions and corrections, and all marginal insertions; also noted in it
are readings from de La Vallée Poussin's edition of the PSP wherever
Q attests a variant reading.
Yonezawa (2005b: 160) describes the manuscript as follows:
Material: Palm leaf
Size: 4.5 x 57 cm.
Line per folio: 7-9
51
Physical condition: 83 leaves. The 10th, 16th, 43rd and 86th
leaves are missing. The 85th folio ends with samskṛtam apratiᵒ
(= LVP 593.5). The right edge of some leaves is defect, thereby
7-8 akṣaras on that part are missing.
Script: Nepālī(?)
The first chapter of the PsP in ms Q originally comprised 14 folios.
As Yonezawa states in his description above, folio 10 (= PSPM 891-
§102 first sentence [= PSP₁ 59.4-66.9]) is missing, thus leaving 13
folios. The right and left edges of folio 1 have broken off, with the
result that 7-14 akṣaras are missing from each line; the right edge of
folio 2 is broken, affecting 6-8 akṣaras per line. The first chapter
colophon reads ācāryacandrakīrttipādoparacitāyām prasannapadā-
yām madhyamakavṛttau pratyayaparīkṣī nāma prathamam prakaṇam
samāptam (sic).
Scribal Error and Correction
As testified to by the mistakes Q shares with P, the text of the PSP
had already accumulated a number of errors, some grave, by the time
ms Q's scribe arranged his exemplar and poised his pen for writing.
Q's text is occasionally marred by errors of dittography and
haplography, as well as mistakes caused by the occasional mis-
reading of similar akṣaras (the latter hypothesized on the basis of
specific mistakes in Q). The most frequent problem is eyeskip, which
occurs much more often than in ms P; it usually involves only one
of Yonezawa's hand-copy, and thus am unable to refer to relevant wording in Q's
later chapters, e.g., in cases of first-chapter citations that also appear later chapters.52
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
aksara (and thus in the cases of madhyamaka written as madhyaka or
nāgārjuna written as nārjuna is relatively insignificant) but not
infrequently is responsible for the loss of two or three akṣaras, or
entire words, in one case more than three sentences. When the scribe
notices that he has made a mistake, he erases the concerned akṣara(s)
and rewrites the text. A number of akṣaras, words and sentences,
some of which may be from a second hand, have been written in the
margins. This marginal material is usually enclosed within two "x"s
and followed by the line-number it pertains to, with the point of
insertion marked in the text with an "x". On the problem of
contamination in ms Q, see below Manuscript Relationships.
Script and Date
Dr. Yonezawa tentatively describes the script as old Nepalese. He
informs me that it is written in a flat-topped style, not in the hooked
style shown by ms P. It attests the archaic gha with an indentation in
its bottom (like P's gha) as opposed to the later style that sets the
indentation on the left side. Its initial e never occurs in the archaic,
closed form. dha is always written with an open top (unlike P’s dha
which is primarily written in the older form) and tha always appears
in a form in which the upper loop has diminished in size and is pulled
upwards, away from the lower, in anticipation of the modern style
(unlike P's tha which remains in the older form).
Since Q's last leaf is missing, a final colophon is not available. On
the basis of the admittedly very limited information about the script,
one is inclined to conjecture that ms Q is more recent than ms P.
Further information about the script and more detailed conclusions
regarding Q's age will hopefully be made available to scholars in the
future.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Paper Manuscripts
Mss A-N
53
All of the paper manuscripts were copied in Nepal, presumably in the
Kathmandu Valley. The close relationships between them are evident
in many of the aberrations in the text they transmit and in specific
features external to this text. All of them bear the same basic
colophon, which identifies the work as the Prasannapadā, the
Madhyamakavṛtti.³4 All but mss A, C and D present in their upper
left margins, where one might expect the work's title, the word
vinaya or its variant vineya,35 or the abbreviations vi.su or vi.ya. Ms G
has vinaya in the left margin and sūtra in the right. Given that B, J
and L exhibit vinaya (L) and vineya (B, J), it can be assumed that
both ms λ, i.e., J and L's common ancestor (see Stemma), and ms ê,
from which B and ms λ descend, also identified the work as a/the
Vinaya Sūtra. The reasons for this identification are unknown. In
ostensibly the first reference to the PsP by a European scholar, the
work is misidentified, probably due to reliance on our ms M and/or
Nepalese informants: Brian H. Hodgson, in an essay first published
in 1828, includes in his list of Buddhist literature of Nepal the
annotated entry "Vineya Sútra, containing an account of the Bodhi
charyá (Buddhism) author Chandrakirti, Achárya. It is equivalent to
the Vyása Sútra of the Brahmans."36 (This is corrected in the 1874
reprint of the essay to "Vinaya Sútra, Treatise on Discipline. Author
Chandra Kírti Achárya. It is equivalent to the Vyása Sútra of the
34 Ms K is incomplete and thus without a final colophon, but it shares its chapter
colophons with the other manuscripts.
35 The manuscript identified during the NGMCP cataloguing work attests vainaya. In
2005 I recorded that the initial pages of the unlocatable “Ōtani manuscript" present
vainaiya.
36 Hodgson 1828: 431.54
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
Brahmans."37) Eugène Burnouf, writing just prior to 1844 about the
content of the PsP, in the footnotes and prose to his "Introduction à
l'histoire du Buddhisme indien" similarly and repeatedly refers to the
title of the work borne by the manuscript he is using (= ms M, given
to the Société Asiatique in 1837 by Hodgson) 38 as the "Vinaya
sūtra. Burnouf is, however, aware that the reference to the Vinaya
is misleading, and informs his reader that even though "Vinaya
patra" appears on the first page of his manuscript and the title is
given as "Vinaya sūtra” in the list of works discovered and received
by Hodgson, neither of these titles appears within the work itself:
9939
Mais aucun de ces titres ne se retrouve dans l'ouvrage même;
le seul que je rencontre à la fin des chapitres est Madhyamaka
vritti, ou Explication de la doctrine Madhyamaka ou
Madhyamika, ouvrage composé par l'Âtchârya Tchandra kîrti.
Quelques lignes d'introduction nous apprennent que le
Madhyamaka vritti est un commentaire qui porte sur des
Kârikâs ou axiomes mémoriaux dont l'auteur est Nâgârdjuna.
C'est très-probablement à ces Kârikâs que s'applique le nom
de Vinaya sûtra ou Vinaya patra, qui est resté à notre volume,
malgré le témoignage du manuscrit lui-même.4⁰
37
Hodgson 1874: 20 (the chapter "Notices on the Language, Literature and Religion
of Nepal and Tibet" from which the above entry is quoted, is a reprint of the earlier
version [with corrections and improvements] published in Asiatic Researches 16
[1928]: 409ff. [reprinted in Hodgson's Illustrations of the Literature and Religion of
the Buddhists, Serampore, 1841, p. 1ff.]) Pandit Amṛtānanda of Lalitpur, who facili-
tated Brian Hodgson's study of Buddhism and helped him to amass his collection of
manuscripts, was certainly aware of the title of the work: when he copied passages
from three chapters of the PsP at Hodgson's request he carefully copied the chapter
colophon before each passage. My thanks to Iain Sinclair for the reference and a
scan of the page and a half copied by Amṛtānanda for Hodgson (Hodgson Papers,
vol. 28, India Office Library in London).
38 Hodgson presented the Société Asiatique with 147 manuscripts in 1837; see
Hunter 1896: 266f.
39
See, e.g., Burnouf 1844: 545, n. 1, 560, nn. 1-4, etc.
4º Burnouf 1844: 559. English translation in Buffetrille and Lopez 2010: 508f. Note
also Burnouf 1844: 562, where he writes, “L'examen du Vinaya sûtra, ou plutôt du
Madhyamika vrìtti, commentaire du Vinaya sûtra, ... .”55
In the right margins of the versos of mss A, B, E and M the
respective scribes have written the word guruḥ; guru appears in D, H,
I and L. Ms F's scribe has written rāmaḥ in the right margins of four
folios at the beginning of the manuscript. Copyists considered such
words to bestow auspiciousness on the scribal undertaking and the
manuscript in general.41
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
It remains a mystery, given that philosophical texts like the PsP are
no longer studied by Newar Buddhists in Nepal, and are not known to
have been studied there in recent centuries, why mss B, D, J and L
and the ten manuscripts of the PSP that descend from J and L (twelve
if we include the manuscript identified by the NGMCP and the
manuscript shown to me in Kyoto) were copied in Kathmandu and/or
environs in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Philosophical
texts, unlike sūtras, were not usually copied for the accumulation of
merit. It is tempting to conjecture that one or two Newar Buddhist
teachers in the Kathmandu Valley familiar with Madhyamaka
thought decided to attempt to revive the dying tradition of
philosophical study by teaching the PsP to his/their students, and
passed on personal exemplars to the students for copying, these
copies being used as the basis for further copies.42 I have been
informed, however, that the study of the PsP at such a late date in
Nepal, while not impossible, is unlikely, and that it is more probable
4¹ Cf. Kragh 2006: 38, n. 39. Cf. also the Ānanda Rāmāyaṇa, Book 7, Canto 21 (cf.
Raghavan 1998: 111), where Lava asks Vasiṣṭha why scribes write “śrī rāma” on
each folio of the manuscripts they copy, and is told that these words remove all
mistakes and are sanctifying.
42 One recalls the observations of Richard Garbe (1925: 102) during a trip to India in
the early nineteenth century. He records upon visiting traditional teaching arenas,
"Die Klassen befanden sich teils im Freien teils unter Bambushütten, einige auch in
Lehmhäusern; überall sassen die Knaben, grösstenteils im Alter von 10-16 Jahren,
auf dem Erdboden, sowie auch die Pandits, von denen einheimische Grammatik,
Poetik, Philosophie und anderes gelehrt wurde. Die Leitfäden und die Texte, die dem
Unterricht zu Grunde lagen, waren fast nur in Handschriften vorhanden, freilich in
ganz modernen Vervielfältigungen.”56
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
that the manuscripts were copied at the request of European scholars
stationed in or visiting Nepal.43
43
Ms A
National Archives, Kathmandu (catalogue no. 3-643).
Filmed by the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project in
1984 (reel no. A 916/5).
Described in Tsukamoto, Matsunaga and Isoda.44
Script: Devanagarī
Physical description: 193 folios; 32.5 x 16.2 cm.; Nepalese paper; 11
lines per folio. The first chapter ends on folio 27v. mā. śā. vyā.
(ostensibly an abbreviation for mādhyamikaśāstravyākhyā) is written
in the upper left margin of each verso, guruḥ in the lower right
margin of each verso. The folio number for the respective page is
written under both mā. śā. vyā. and guruḥ.
Colophon (corrected): āryacandrakīrtipādoparacitāyām prasanna-
padāyām madhyamakavṛttau dṛṣṭiparīkṣā nāma saptavimśatitamam
prakaraṇam samāptam || || samāptam cedam madhyamakaśāstraṇ
sakalalaukikalokottarapravacananītaneyārthavyākhyānanaipunya-
viśāradam śrāvakapratyekabuddhānuttarasamyaksambuddhabodhi-
maṇḍāsanadāyakam iti ||
The manuscript is not dated.
Tsukamoto et al.45 note correctly that the Mādhyamikavṛtti entry no.
140 of the Bir Library is equivalent to three entries in the
46
45
43 I am grateful to Mahes Raj Pant and Iain Sinclair for their comments on the
possible reasons behind the production of the PSP paper manuscripts.
44 Tsukamoto et al. 1990: 238, item 5.
Tsukamoto et al. 1990: 237, item 1.
46 The Bir Library (Vīrapustakālaya), named after the Nepalese Prime Minister Bir
Samser Jung Bahadur Rana who founded it shortly after Cecil Bendall's stay in
Nepal in 1884, is also known as the Durbar Library. See the Introduction in Grünen-PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Kathmandu National Archives catalogue, viz. Bṛhatsūcīpatra nos. 3-
643 (my ms A), 3-299 (my ms E), and 3-598 (my ms F). Tsukamoto
et al.47 also refer to a Madhyamakavṛtti manuscript recorded by Sastri
(1915: 242) amongst the then "not yet registered" manuscripts of the
Durbar Library.48 This manuscript is said to be written on Nepalese
paper in Nevārī script, to measure 13 x 7 inches, and to consist of 163
folios, 11 lines per folio. Grünendahl includes the manuscript in his
Concordance with the additional information that the manuscript was
filmed by the NGMPP as reel number A 916/5, i.e., the reel number
for my ms A, and refers his reader to the Bṛhatsūcīpatra Vol. 7, 2, p.
127, no. 174, of the National Archives.49 This Bṛhatsūcīpatra entry
has the catalogue number 3-643 (the catalogue number for my ms A)
and the additional information recorded there states that the
manuscript is written in Devanagarī—not in Nevārī, the script Śāstri,
Tsukamoto et al., and Grünendahl recorded for it and further notes
the manuscript as containing 193, not 163 folios. Thus Sastri's
Durbar Library Madhyamakavṛtti entry can only be yet another,
though faulty, record of my ms A.50
Ms B
57
51
Private collection of Āśā Kājī Vajrācārya of Patan, Nepal.5¹
dahl 1989 and Jacques May's review of Grünendahl's Concordance. May (1991:
152) notes, "Elle fait maintenant partie des Archives Nationales du Népal, mais elle
y a conservé son individualité."
47
See Tsukamoto et al. 1990: 238, item 6.
48 See also Grünendahl's reprint of the catalogue (1989: 720).
49
See Grünendahl 1989: CXI.
5⁰ Śāstri (1915: 242), noting in his manuscript description that "Prof. Louis de La
Valle (sic) Poussin is editing it in the Bibliotheca Buddhika" (sic) likely intends to
refer to Poussin's editing of the text in general rather than to assert (erroneously)
that he was utilizing this specific manuscript.
51 For information on Āśā Kājī Vajrācārya, see Mr. Bidya Bhushan Bajracharya's
(1995: 12-14) “A Brief Biography of Pandit Vaidya Asha Kaji Bajracharya.”58
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
Filmed by the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project in
1981 (reel no. E 1294/3).
Described by Takaoka³2 (catalogue no. KA 45, microfilm reel no. R-
KA 1) and by Tsukamoto et al.53
Script: Devanagarī
Physical description: 207 folios; 31.8 x 12.7 cm.; Nepalese paper; 9-
10 lines per folio. The first chapter ends on folio 28v. vineya. is
written in the upper left margin of each verso folio, guruḥ in the
lower right margin of each verso folio. The folio number for the
respective folio is written under both vineya. and guruḥ.
Colophon: as A (ācārya for ārya). The colophon continues with the
specifics of the date:54 nandeṣvanke tape śukle vāṇītithau samālikhet ||
vineyasūtram ity uktam jvālāmunir idam param || sarvasūtrāntare
[']dṛṣṭvā śāstresu nipunam kṛtam || jñānodayam ācāryyasya sat-
jñānena dhīmatā || śrīr astu || || śreyo 'stu samvat 959 māghaśukla-
śrīpamcamī ādityavāra
Date: N.S. 959 (= A.D. 1839)
Ms C
National Archives, Kathmandu (catalogue no. 5-32).
Filmed by the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project, 1971
(reel no. B 90/3).
52
See Takaoka 1981: 19. Takaoka's filming took place from 1975 to 1980.
53
See Tsukamoto et al. 1990: 238, item 12.
54 Kashinath Tamot, previously a staff-member of the NGMPP (now employed with
the NGMCP) in Kathmandu, kindly deciphered the date given here. He explains:
nanda = Nanda (the sibling kings of Pāṭaliputra) = 9; ișu = arrow =
5; anka = figure
= 9; tape (for tapasi) = tapas = the month of Māgha; vāṇī = Sarasvatī; Śrīpañcamī =
the day Sarasvati is worshipped. The date is given again in numerical form and in its
more common form following the words śrīr astu. My thanks also to Prof. Alexan-
der von Rospatt for arranging for the dating of this manuscript, and for other
valuable information he shared with me based on his work in Nepal.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Described by Tsukamoto et al.55
Script: Nepalese
Physical description: 252 folios; 41 x 11 cm.; Nepalese paper; 6 lines
per folio. The first chapter ends on folio 36r. Illustration of four-
armed yellow Prajñāpāramitā in the centre of folio 1v.56 Folios
numbered in the centre left and centre right margins of verso folios
using respectively the older akṣara numerals and relatively modern
figure numerals.
Colophon: as A57
The manuscript is not dated.
Ms D
59
Keshar Library, Kathmandu (catalogue no. 9-182). The title
according to the catalogue and the title on the separate "title" page is
sakalapravacanārthasamgraha (corrected).58 The title on folio 1r is
given as prajñāpāramitāṭīkā.
55
See Tsukamoto et al. 1990: 238, item 7.
56 Pītaprajñāpāramitā is frequently found adorning book-covers and manuscripts in
Tibet and Nepal; examples may be seen, e.g., in the exhibition catalogue Tibetische
Buchdeckel (see Grönbold 1991). Antoinette K. Gordon (1959: 74) describes her as
holding her inner two hands in the dharmacakramudrā, with a book in the outer left
hand and either a mālā in the right hand or holding the right in the abhayamudrā. In
ms C's illustration she holds a mālā. On the various forms of Prajñāpāramitā, see,
e.g., Conze 1968.
57 The colophon continues on with: ye dharmmā hetuprabhavā hetus teṣām tathā-
gataḥ || hy avadat teṣām yo nirodha evaṇvādī mahā[śra]maṇaḥ || ||
58 This title was presumably added once the manuscript was brought to the Keshar
Library; underneath it are recorded other statistics of the manuscript such as its
Keshar Library catalogue number, that it is a “bauddhagrantha" and, erroneously,
that it is in Nāgarī script. De Jong (1979: 542) attributes to a scribe the text ācārya-
candrakīrtipādoparacitā sakalapravacanārthasamgranthanamadhyamakaśāstrastu-
tiḥ parisamāptā, etc., which follows the so-called Madhyamakaśāstrastuti (included
after the PSP colophon in ms D). The individual who recorded the title for the
separate title page appears to have assumed that the words printed here in bold60
Filmed by the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project, 1975
(reel no. C 19/8).
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
Script: Nepalese³⁹
Physical description: 111 folios; 39 x 15.9 cm.; Nepalese paper; 13
lines per folio. The first chapter ends on folio 15r. The second title
folio (= folio 1r) gives prajñāpāramitāṭīkā as the title; under this is
written "patra
113." The scribe numbers folio 65 as 66 and thus
the folio numbering from “66” on is off by a folio. Half of folio 112v
(actually folio 111v) and the folio numbered 113 (actually 112r)
contain the text for the Madhyamakaśāstrastuti.60 The versos are
numbered in the centre right margin and on the majority of the folios
guru is written above each number.
Colophon: as A
The ms is not dated.
This manuscript was discovered by Giuseppe Tucci and a
photocopy of it was used by J.W. de Jong to make his edition of the
MMK (1977) and to compile his "Textcritical Notes on the
Prasannapadā” (1978).
indicate the title of the entire work contained by the manuscript, i.e., the PsP
together with the final stuti.
59
See also the manuscript and script description in Kragh 2006: 38f. Kragh
concludes that the manuscript may belong to the late nineteenth or twentieth century.
6⁰ The colophon is followed by the fourteen stanzas given the name Madhyamaka-
śāstrastuti. For the Sanskrit and Tibetan text and a French translation, see de Jong
1979: 541-550.
61 The library of the Oriental department of the Istituto Italiano per l'Africa e
l'Oriente holds a photographic copy of the manuscript and kindly sent a copy of this
copy to me, and J.W. de Jong generously sent me his wife's romanization of the first
chapter of the copy of the manuscript lent to him by Tucci. I was thus able to
compare both de Jong's copy of ms R and the Rome copy of the Tucci manuscript
with the NGMPP film and to confirm that the manuscript found by Tucci and used
by de Jong is indeed the manuscript of the Keshar Library in Kathmandu.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Ms E
62
Described in Tsukamoto et al.6
National Archives, Kathmandu (catalogue no. 3-299).
Filmed by the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project, date
of filming not recorded (reel no. B 88/6).
61
Script: Devanagarī
Physical description: 161 folios; 35 x 14 cm.; Nepalese paper; 11
lines per folio. The first chapter ends on folio 23r. Written in the
upper left margin of each verso folio is, on folio 1v, viyana, on folios
2 to 47, vinaya, and from folio 48 on vineya; guruḥ is written in the
lower right margin of each verso folio. The number for the respective
folio is written under guruh.
Colophon: as A
The manuscript is not dated.
Ms F
National Archives, Kathmandu (catalogue no. 3-598).
Filmed by the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project, 1984
(reel no. A 916/6-A 917/1).
Described in Tsukamoto et al.63
Script: Devanagarī
Physical description: 145 folios; 31 x 15.7 cm.; Nepalese paper; 12
lines per folio. The first chapter ends on folio 22v. vinaya is written
in the upper left margin of each verso folio up to folio 70; folio 71
has in its place vinamya; folios 72 and 73 vineya; from folio 74 on
vi.ya; rāmaḥ is written above the folio number in the lower right
62 See Tsukamoto et al. 1990: 238, item 3.
63
See Tsukamoto et al. 1990: 238, item 4.62
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
margin on the versos 1, 3, 4 and 5. The number for the respective
folio is written under vinaya and its variants and also appears in the
lower right margin.
Colophon: as A, then continues with śubham astu naranae
varṣaghasre nabhā saptami nīlike budhadine ṣaḍānamdalikhitam
(sic) sūtram uttamam. This final part of the colophon includes the
date the manuscript was copied, but my correspondents in Nepal
were not able to determine the meaning of naranae as a specific
year.64
Ms G
Private collection of M.V. Vajrācārya, Kathmandu.
Filmed by the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project, 1983
(reel no. E 1478/2). The catalogue card adds that vinayasutra is
written in the margin.
This manuscript was also filmed by the Institute for Advanced
Studies of World Religion (IASWR) in New York under the film
strip number MBB-1971-62.65
Described in Tsukamoto et al. where the IASWR film is referred to
and the date of the manuscript is given as N.S. 880.66 This date
appears to be based on a misunderstanding: The IASWR information
sheet for the manuscript gives +880 as the number of years to be
added to a Nepal Samvat date for a reckoning of the corresponding
year of the Common Era, but does not enter a date for the
manuscript. No date is indicated in the manuscript colophon.
Script: Nepalese
64 "The excellent sūtra was written by Ṣaḍānanda in the year Naranae (=?), [in the
month of ] Śrāvaṇa, Kṛṣṇasaptamī Budhavāra."
65
Copies of this manuscript, as well as of mss D, H, I, J and K, were used by Saito
(1985) to correct a number of kārikās of the MMK.
66
See Tsukamoto et al. 1990: 238, item 8.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
Physical description: 231 folios; 33.7 x 9.4 cm.; Nepalese paper; 7
lines per folio. The first chapter ends on folio 34r. vinaya is written in
the upper left margin of each verso, sūtra in the lower right margin.
The number for the respective folio is written under both vinaya and
sutra.
Colophon: as A
The manuscript is not dated.
Ms H
Tokyo University Library (no. 250).
Described in Matsunami"7 and Tsukamoto et al.68
Script: Devanagarī
Physical description: 246 folios; 12 x 5 inches; Nepalese paper; 8-9
lines per folio. The first chapter ends on folio 34v. viyana is written
in the upper left margin of the first verso, vinaya in the upper left
margin of the following versos (fol. 134 omits vinaya, fol. 135-140
have vine, fol. 141-224 vineya, 224 to the end vinaya); guru
written in the lower right margin of the versos. The number for the
respective folio is written under both vinaya and guru.
Colophon: as A
The manuscript is not dated.
Ms I
63
Tokyo University Library (no. 252).
Described in Matsunami 6⁹ and Tsukamoto et al.7º
69
70
67 See Matsunami 1965: 94, 356-7.
68 See Tsukamoto et al. 1990: 239, item 13.64
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
Script: Nepalese
Physical description: 303 folios; 12 x 4 3/4 inches; Nepalese paper; 8
lines per folio. The first chapter ends on folio 40v. vinaya is written
in the upper left margin of versos, guru in the lower right margin of
versos. The number for the respective folio is written in the centre of
the right margin of versos. Rectos are stamped at the bottom with
"Belongs to Nudima Nundu."
Colophon: as A
The manuscript is not dated.
Ms J
Tokyo University Library (no. 251).
Described in Matsunami7¹ and Tsukamoto et al.72
Script: Nepalese
Physical description: 241 folios; 141/4 x 31/2 inches; Nepalese paper;
6 lines per folio. The first chapter ends on folio 34v. vineya is written
in the upper left margin of each verso. The folio number for the
respective folio is written under vineya and in the centre of the right
margin of versos. Folio 1v has an empty space in its centre that
approximates the space taken up by ms C's illustration of Prajñā-
pāramitā.
Colophon: as A, then continues:73 śubham || ye dharmā hetuprabhavā
hetun teṣān tathāgataḥ || hy avadat teṣām yo nirodha evamvādī mahā-
69
See Matsunami 1965: 95, 356-7.
70 See Tsukamoto et al. 1990: 239, item 15.
71 See Matsunami 1965: 95, 356-7.
72 See Tsukamoto et al. 1990: 239, item 14.
73
The date is written after the mangala citation ye dharmā, etc. (Vin I.40; Mahāvastu
III.62; see Lamotte 1980: 2164). It is stated that the manuscript was finished "on the
day of Nepal Samvat 851 (A.D. 1731) Caitraśuklapūrṇimā Jyeṣṭhā Nakṣatra
Śukravāra.” The learned Kashinath Tamot of the NGMPP/NGMCP in KathmanduPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
śramaṇaḥ || || nepālābde nilāhāre tanurahite pamkodbhavotpanna-
khaṇḍe rākāyām māsi caitre dviradavahanabhe kāvya ghasrāntagha-
sre bhāṣā vyanvayojjovyayabhavajakakaivallyadovīnanaji pūstam
vaineyasūtram vyalikhad atim udā śāstrasimhasya prītyai¹4
Date: N.S. 851 (A.D. 1731)
Ms K
65
Institute for Advanced Studies of World Religions (microfilm no.
MBB-1973-117).
=
75
Described in Ts amoto et al.
Script: Nepalese
Physical Description: 142 folios, 34 x 8 cm.; Nepalese paper; 7 lines
per folio. The first chapter ends on folio 33r. vinaya is written in the
upper left margin of versos. Folio numbers are written in the centre
of the right-hand margins of versos.
Colophon: the manuscript is incomplete and ends with folio 142v.
The manuscript is not dated.
interpreted the date given in the colophon as follows: nepālābde = nepāla + abda
Nepal Samvat; nilāhāre anila + āhāra = wind-eating = sarpa (serpent) = 8;
tanurahite = tanu + rahita (without body) = ananga (bodyless) = 5 (Tamot adds here
that ananga or kāmadeva indicates the figure 13, but that here it seems to be used in
the sense of kāmaśara "arrow of Kāma,” that is, 5); pamkodbhavotpannakhaṇḍe =
pamka + udbhava + utpanna + khaṇḍa = pańka (mud) + udbhava (production) :
pańkodbhava = kamala (lotus) + utpanna (born) = pańkodbhavotpanna = born from
the lotus = Brahmā = Pitāmaha = 1 (khanda, states Tamot, has been added to refer to
Brahmaloka; the scribe of ms J must have understood Pitāmaha as not just referring
to Brahmā but also to his abode); rākāyām māsi caitre = the full-moon in the month
of Caitra = Caitraśuklapūrnimā; dviradavahanabhe = dvi-rada+vahana + bha =
two-tusk + rider + Nakṣatra = elephant-rider (Indra) Nakṣatra = Jestha Nakṣatra;
kāvya = Śukra, the preceptor of the Asuras = Śukrācārya = Śukravāra = Friday; gha-
srānta = at the end of the day.
74
I have not been able to decipher this final sentence.
75
See Tsukamoto et al. 1990: 238, item 9.
=66
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
Ms L
Cambridge University Library Add. 1483.
Described in Bendall76 and Tsukamoto et al.77
Script: Devanagarī
Physical description: 178 folios; 41/2 x 14 inches; Nepalese paper; 9
lines per folio. The first chapter ends on folio 27v. vinaya is written
in the upper left margin of versos, guru in the lower right margins of
versos. The number for the respective folio is written under both
vinaya and guru.
Colophon: as A
Date: N.S. 90178 (A.D. 1781)
This is de La Vallée Poussin's Cambridge manuscript. He refers to it
by way of the abbreviation "Cambr.”
Ms M
Société Asiatique (No. 8).
Described in Filliozat” and Tsukamoto et al.8⁰
Script: Devanagarī
Physical description: 189 folios; 440 x 130 mm.; Nepalese paper; 7
lines per folio. The first chapter ends on folio 26v. vi.sū is written in
the upper left margin of versos, guruḥ in the lower right margin of
76
See Bendall 1992: 114-117. Kragh (2006: 22, n. 22) notes that ms L was brought
to the Cambridge University Library by Daniel Wright, the surgeon to the British
Residency in Kathmandu from 1873-1876.
77 See Tsukamoto et al. 1990: 237, item 2.
78 The date is given only in numerical form. See also the manuscript description in
Kragh 2006: 38.
79 See Filliozat 1942: 12-13.
80
See Tsukamoto et al. 1990: 238, item 10.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
67
versos. The number for the respective folio is written under both vi.sū
and guruh.
Colophon: as A81
The manuscript is not dated. Filliozat records, “Sans date (début
XIXe siècle). Provenance: Népal. -Don Hodgeson, 1837."
This is de La Vallée Poussin's Paris manuscript. He refers to it as
"Paris."
Ms N
The Asiatic Society, Calcutta.
82
Described in Mitra³² (catalogue no. B 2) and Tsukamoto et al.³
83
Script: Nepalese
Physical description: 188 folios, 16 x 4 inches; Nepalese paper; 7
lines per
folio. The first chapter ends on folio 30r. vinaya is written
the upper left margin of versos, the folio number for the respective
page is written in the centre right margin of versos.
84
Colophon: as A
The manuscript is not dated.
This is de La Vallée Poussin's Calcutta manuscript. He refers to it by
way of the abbreviation "Calc."
81 The colophon is followed by: ye dharmā, etc.
82 See Mitra 1971: 169f. Kragh (2006: 22, n. 22) notes that ms N was passed on to
the Asiatic Society of Bengal (now Asiatic Society) by Brian H. Hodgson sometime
between 1827 and 1845. See Hunter 1896: 352.
83
See Tsukamoto et al. 1990: 238, item 11.
84 The manuscript was used by a scholar in late 1994 and early 1995. This person
marked many of the pages with crosses and the date to remind himself where he
stopped each day, drawing some of his crosses in the body of the text over the
akṣaras, certainly not a practice conducive to the preservation of manuscripts!68
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
Scribal Error and Correction
The fourteen paper manuscripts contain a wide variety of forms of
scribal interpretation and error. Many of the errors fit into the
classical categories of eyeskip (aberratio occuli; saut du même au
même),85 haplography, dittography, metathesis, misreading of
visually similar akṣaras, and substitution of acoustically similar
akṣaras. The most prominent of the last category are errors involving
the sibilants s, ș and s. By referring to them as “acoustic” errors I do
not intend to suggest that any of the manuscripts were dictated, which
they clearly were not, but rather that the scribes, glancing from the
exemplar to the folio they were writing on, sometimes wrote
according to the pronunciation with which they were most familiar,
possibly mentally uttering words and sentences as a retention aid.
One might add to the list a type of error not dissimilar to eyeskip in
that text is omitted but which is the result of a faulty co-ordination of
mental activity and the physical act of writing: given that the scribes
were quickly memorizing short portions of the exemplar's text and
thus copying by memory, text could be dropped when the visualized
or mentally repeated memorized words were the main focus and the
hand did not keep pace with the mental reading or speaking.³
86
The main types of errors in the fourteen paper manuscripts written in
either Devanagarī or Nepalese script that occur in regard to visually
similar akṣaras are well known to those who have worked with
85 Instances of homoeorarcton and homoeoteleuton are rare. Eyeskip primarily
occurs between relatively proximate akṣaras within the same line. See Greetham
1992: 280 for Vinaver's diagram of scribal copying and a few words regarding
correction of its flaws.
86
It might not be out of place to mention other mistakes that occur when the hand
does not cooperate with the mental plan, and for which instances can be drawn from
the slips and surprises occurring in one's own writing (e.g., when one intends to
write "cup of coffee" but writes "cuff...," or intends to write "5" but is surprised to
see that one has produced "4," perhaps because a “4” had just been written or stands
elsewhere on the page). Errors in this category are often similar to those of speech
errors and like them tend to involve blending, anticipation, perseveration and
omission (cf. Proto 2010). Such errors may not occur as often as the classical types,
but they do appear to account for many of the lapses that cannot be explained by way
of the usual categories of scribal error.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
69
relatively recent manuscripts from Nepal. The copyist's misreading
of imprecisely written akṣaras in the
the exemplar and his
misinterpretation of correctly scribed forms stand behind many of the
variants in the PSP paper manuscripts. Among the Devanagarī
manuscripts, the most common errors, to mention only a few, stem
from a misreading or misinterpretation of the following akṣaras (here
in a rough descending order of occurrence): ca and va; pa, ya and șa;
sa and ma; ta and na; sva, tva, sya and tya; sa and ṇa; superscript r,
anusvāra, medial e diagonal stroke, medial i curved stroke and
virāma belonging to the line above; nn and nt; pra, pu and pr; initial u
and du; bha and nna.87 The Nepalese manuscripts share these errors
and add to this primary group errors such as those involving a
confusion of ca, va and ra; ka, ja and kṣa; kṣya, jya and hya; bha,
dbha, ha and pha; tya, bhya and sya.
88
89
The manuscripts occasionally attest variants involving akṣara-change
due to the scribes having been influenced by the graphic features of
the lower and upper extremes of the akṣaras of, respectively, the line
above and the line below the one being recorded in the exemplar; the
scribes mistook the parts of akṣaras extending down or up to the
87
It should not be forgotten that corrections also enter a manuscript line on the basis
of these similarities in letters. A dropped anusvāra may be picked up again in the
next manuscript owing to a superscript r or a vowel marker in the vicinity being
misread; a falsely recorded șa (for pa) may in the next copy of the manuscript be
"erroneously" written as pa.
88 The Nepalese-script manuscripts do not tend to confuse bha and nna. The
Devanāgarī medial e diagonal stroke occurs in Nepalese script only as the secondary
marker for the vowels ai and au, always in conjunction with another primary vowel
marker.
89 Nepalese-script manuscripts are in general also prone to confusions of tta and ttu,
and tya and tyu when the tt and ty of these akṣaras are formed by adding a separate
stroke underneath the main body of the akṣara. Mss C, J, and N present these
akṣaras with the lower stroke attached to the main body and so avoid the problem.
The scribes of mss G and D, on the other hand, often form these akṣaras with the
lower stroke separate from the main body, and G’s scribe, seemingly momentarily
confused about the number of lower independent strokes he must write when two
such akṣaras follow one another, tends to add an extra stroke which thus appears as
a medial u; e.g., C's prāptyatyupagamāt (for prāptyabhyupagamāt) is copied into G
as prāptyutyupagamāt and [ity] atyupagaᵒ (for abhyupagaº) is copied as [ity] utyupa-
gaºᵒ.70
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
line they were copying as being an integral part of the akṣaras they
were in the process of writing. virāmas, the long downward strokes
of certain akṣaras (sa, ha, tya, la, etc.) and the lower vowels u and ū
of akṣaras of the line above, and superscript r, the upper markers of
medial vowels and anusvāras belonging to the line below are at times
reinterpreted as part of the akṣara being copied, such that vowels
become added or change grades, superscript r and new anusvāras are
mistakenly incorporated, and other corruptions are introduced into
the text. Ms N's scribe is especially susceptible to being influenced
by the long downward flourishes of the tails of the akṣaras sa, ha,
tya, la, etc., of ms J, and thus prone to annexing new vowel-markers
to his line of writing; for example, nopalabhante of J becomes
naupalabhante in N on account of the long downward diagonal tail of
J's akṣara nna (varnṇayanti) of the line above that only ends when it
touches the no° of the line beneath it. Ms J's scribe additionally pens
superscript r nearly the size of the akṣara it perches on and as a
result, the r sometimes grazes the bottom of the akṣara of the line
above it. This graphic peculiarity induces N's scribe on occasion to
perceive J's superscript r, or at least its top curve, as part of the
akṣara it grazes and he records, for example, the word
vyavasthāpyata (a written as a very short vertical stroke) as vyava-
sthupyata, having judged the curve of J's r brushing the underside of
ᵒsthā to be the vowel u. More often, he is prompted to include in N
anusvāras that do not appear in ms J: he mistakes the slightly thicker
endpoint of the downward tail of an akṣara from the line above for an
anusvāra, overlooking that this "anusvāra" is actually part of the
akṣara above or assuming that the stroke from above simply ends at
the "anusvāra." His misperception leads, for example,
to yā
becoming corrupted to yām because the dot at the end of the tail of tt
of the line above (in J's aṇupapattir [sic]) has been interpreted as an
anusvāra.
The Nepalese-script manuscripts are also prone to changes involving
the medial vowels e, o, ai and au owing to the fact that all of these
vowels usually take as their primary indicator a wavy horizontal line
or "squiggle" over the akṣara, which replaces the regular straight
horizontal stroke that otherwise constitutes the top of akṣaras. The
squiggle in manuscripts J and I (less often C, D, G and N) is oftenPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
71
quite difficult to distinguish from the regular horizontal stroke: the
scribe of ms J tends to allow the vertical strokes of the akṣaras to
extend slightly above the line," thereby making it nearly impossible
in some instances for the reader to differentiate between upward
intrusions of the aksara's vertical lines and a slight squiggle, and ms
I is written in a quite messy hand, with the "straight" horizontal lines
often slightly curved or slanted; fortunately ms I's scribe often
accentuates the size of the curves of the vowel squiggles. The loss of
the correct reading e for a, of a for e, and of à for o in the manu-
scripts that stem from J has often been caused by, in the case of the
loss of e for a, a failure to read the squiggle as such or, in the case of
the loss of a for e, and à for o, the reading of a squiggle where one
was not intended. Further, on occasion dandas to the left of an aksara
are taken for a pṛṣṭhamātrā medial vowel indicator, thus leading to
vowel changes. The degree of scribal misinterpretation of vowels in
manuscripts written in Nepalese script, indeed as regards all the
varieties of scribal error, of course increased over the centuries
because the majority of later scribes copying Sanskrit manuscripts in
Nepal did not, even though they would have recognized some
cognates and stock phrases, understand the content of the text. The
least reliable of our paper manuscripts were written by scribes who
obviously had no understanding of the language or content of the PSP
and mechanically produced their new copies primarily in reliance on
the graphics of the pages before them.
The situation becomes more complicated when Devanagarī
manuscripts are copied from exemplars written in Nepalese script,
and vice-versa. In addition to the most basic errors and
90 These very slight upward projections of the vertical lines do not occur with every
akṣara, nor do they occur consistently in identical akṣaras. The top horizontal line
breaks after most akṣaras, and thus I do not think that this style of Nepalese script
can be an example of the script Bendall refers to in his discussion of Nepalese
manuscripts of the sixteenth century (ms J is eighteenth c.), although the very slight
extensions to be seen in J may be remnants of this earlier style. See Bendall 1992:
Palaeographical Introduction, p. xxxi, where he writes, “Dated MSS of the XVIth
century are almost too scarce to afford a basis for generalization, as we possess only
five examples. These, nevertheless, have in common the important feature of
showing the horizontal top line nearly continuous, while the vertical strokes often
slightly project above this line ...."72
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
misinterpretations discussed above, new possibilities for the
misreading of akṣaras present themselves when the copyist is reading
one script and writing in another, perhaps even imaging specific
akṣaras of one script as he writes. The following misreadings, based
on a similarity of akṣara forms, occur in the Devanagarī manuscripts
that have been copied from manuscripts written in Nepalese script
(the list is not comprehensive): ra read as na; jya as nya; bhya as tya;
bhyu as bhya; tta as tu; tya as tyu; bha and dbha as ha; pra as pu; pha
as ha; ku as kta; kṣa as ka; initial e as u or nu. The wavy medial
vowel indicator is also occasionally overlooked, and the pṛṣṭhamātrā
vowel indicator is sometimes taken as a danda or as part of the
previous word. Not infrequently do the scribes copy the wavy vowel
indicator into their Devanāgarī manuscript in place of the Devanagarī
medial e, etc., stroke (ms L's scribe is the best example); these wavy
vowel indicators in the Devanagarī manuscripts are, as might be
expected, often lost when the manuscript is then copied by scribes
also writing in Devanāgarī, but tend to be transmitted when the
Devanāgarī manuscript attesting them is copied back into Nepalese
script. A similar process tends to take place with the Nepalese
akṣaras bha and dbha, and on occasion with ca, ra and na.
Some interesting examples of the changes to akṣaras and the
corrections that can occur within a lineage of alternating script
transmission present themselves in the L manuscript family.
Devanagarī ms L was, given the number of Nepalese features in it,
without doubt copied from a Nepalese manuscript. In one instance,
ms L's scribe wrote the final vowel o of the compound ekārtho
Nepalese style by simply incorporating the Nepalese pṛṣṭhamātrā
vowel indicator into the space to the left of the final akṣara that
would otherwise be read in Devanāgarī as ᵒthā. Ms E's scribe (also
writing in Devanagarī) did not copy the strange stroke and passed on
the incorrect reading ᵒthā to mss A, H and I. Ms K's scribe, writing
in Nepalese script, recognized the vowel indicator in L and wrote the
word correctly. Ms F's scribe, copying from ms K into Devanāgarī,
correctly identified K's Nepalese-script ᵒtho and wrote Devanagarī
ᵒtho, thereby bringing the (accurately represented) akṣara into a
Devanagarī manuscript for the first time. A similar transmission
takes place with the conjunct dbhã in the compound samāsāsadbhā-PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
73
vāc: Devanagarī ms L's scribe misreads the Nepalese dbha in his
exemplar as hā, but is sufficiently unsure of the akṣara to preserve
some of its original form. Ms E's scribe, also writing in Devanāgarī,
finds this hā rather strange, and copies it in the form in which it is
displayed in ms L. Ms A's and ms H's scribes, both writing in
Devanagarī, ignore the somewhat irregular shape of the aksara in ms
E and copy it as a definite hā. The scribe of Nepalese-script ms I,
however, who is also relying on Devanāgarī ms E, recognizes the
shape as indicative of the Nepalese conjunct dbhā, and transcribes it
correctly into his text. As in the case of ms I's scribe reading from
ms E, Nepalese-script ms K's scribe correctly identifies ms L's
strange akṣara as dbhā and writes it clearly as such, thereby allowing
for its non-mistaken recognition and transcription in Devanāgarī by
ms F's scribe.
In another instance, this time a fairly simple one involving the three
manuscripts C, G and M, all of which descend from ms J, an error
concerning the akṣara ca ends up being rectified when it undergoes
transcription into Devanagarī. Nepalese-script ms J's scribe correctly
records na capi, but Nepalese-script ms C's scribe reads the
relatively small ca as ra, and passes na rāpi on to ms G (Nepalese).
Ms M's scribe, however, writing and likely thinking in terms of
Devanagarī (a Nepalese ra can easily be taken to represent a tightly
written ca) assumes the akṣara to be ca, and thereby returns the
correct reading, two generations later, to the lineage. "Corrections"
such as the three just described occur not infrequently, and would
appear to be an important aspect of an alternating script transmission.
On the other hand, the easy confusion of akṣaras in the two scripts
leads to a rapid accumulation of scribal errors within manuscript
lineages. This can be exemplified with the compound yuktyanu-
pādānena, which ms L's scribe records correctly but with a slightly
curved virāma under the k."1¹ Ms E's scribe, also writing in
Devanagarī, judges the deformed virāma to be an irrelevant mark,
ignores it, and passes the incorrect reading yukatyanu on to mss A,
91
⁹¹ One wonders, given that both the relatively reliable manuscripts B and J attest
yuktyunupādānena and that Nepalese ktyu is sometimes written as ktya when
transcribed into Devanāgarī, if this correct reading in L might itself be the result of a
misreading of its Nepalese exemplar which also contained the akṣara ktyu.74
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
H, and I. Nepalese-script ms K's scribe interprets the virāma to be a
legitimately formed Nepalese medial u, and records yukutyanuᵒ. Ms
F's scribe, writing in Devanagarī, does not understand ms K's
Nepalese u, and taking it to be the akṣara t in the conjunct kta, writes
yuktatyanu, thereby further corrupting the original yuktyanu."
92
All of the above needs to be taken into consideration when one
examines the critical edition's apparatus and considers the variants in
it with regard to the stemma for the witnesses. Certain footnote
entries would seem to speak against the manuscript relationships
given by the stemma, but most of the seeming discrepancies resolve
themselves when the various possibilities for corruption within a
tradition of alternating scripts are called to mind. The remaining
discrepancies that do not yield to such considerations can be
understood from an examination of the manuscripts, where
discovers misinterpreted marks at the end of a line, slightly deformed
and thus ambiguous akṣaras in a manuscript's exemplar, or
intrusions of akṣaras or parts thereof from the alternate script, and all
other types of markings that only become evident with a viewing of
the akṣara in question and its environs. Only on a few rare occasions
did I encounter in the paper manuscripts what appeared to be
"determined" variants as opposed to "mechanical" variants," and
even then the determined variants involved only simple Sanskrit
words such as sarva (corrected from sava), iti (corrected from itī) or
common ones, at least for a Madhyamaka text, such as
pratītyasamutpāda (corrected from pratītasamutpāda), nāgārjuna
(corrected from nāgājuna), and anupādānena (wrongly "corrected"
to anutpādānena). Though the possibility cannot be completely
93
⁹2 Interesting, too, are the changes to the same compound in the J family of
manuscripts and the unexpected corrections that occur there. Ms J (Nepalese)
presents the incorrect yuktyunupādānena. Ms C's scribe, writing in Nepalese script,
misreads the initial yu as pu and records puktyunu° but ms G's scribe, also writing in
Nepalese script, corrects the pu back to yu. Ms M's scribe, writing in Devanāgarī,
also corrects C's pu to yu and, overlooking the Nepalese u of the akṣara ktyu,
writes correctly!-yuktyanuᵒ, but then unnecessarily adds a t, thus recording
yuktyanutpädanena.
⁹3 For the distinction between these two categories of variants, see Greetham 1992:
279-283.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
75
discarded that some scribes did attempt to correct the mistakes that
seemed obvious to them, certain improvements may, indeed, have
been influenced by a graphic feature in an exemplar not available to
this study, by an ink-mark that has now faded and cannot be
recognized on the films or photocopies, or by a feature of the paper
itself that has broken off.
One of the most striking features in what might be called the later
"graphic transmission" of the PsP-especially as evidenced by the
manuscripts lowest on the stemma i.e., a transmission of
consonants and their conjuncts, vowels, visargas, dandas, etc., which
collectively, i.e., as words and compounds composing meaningful
sentences, were often not understood by the scribes, is the care that
many of the scribes took to reproduce the akṣaras as graphically
portrayed in the exemplar before them, which allowed for, as stated
and exemplified above, on occasion, the later correct recognition of
certain akṣaras, or, conversely, led to the intrusion of unwanted
graphics. The more unwelcome side of the scribes' proclivity to
preserve the graphics that struck them as curious is that the
manuscripts not rarely present akṣaras that can only have been
intentionally ambiguously written. This holds especially true for the
Nepalese wavy medial vowel indicator, for the akṣaras na and ta as
first members of conjuncts, and for ya and pa, va and ca, to name
only a few. Obviously in some cases the scribes did not want to
commit themselves to the interpretation of an akṣara that they were
unsure about or that may have already been written ambiguously in
their exemplar, and so recorded the grapheme in a vague, unclear
form that was capable of yielding more than one interpretation. This
frustrates the process of recording variants, but when the aksara
looked, for example, even a bit more like "pa" (correct reading) than
"ya," I usually gave the scribe the benefit of the doubt.
Although it is an indisputable fact that many of the more recent
Sanskrit manuscripts written in Nepal often bear numerous petty and
appalling errors which can only have their root in the incompetence
and carelessness of the scribes,94 there is no question that further
94 Siegfried Lienhard (1988: XXVII) writes of a dismaying situation as concerns
bilingual manuscripts in Nepal: “While the Sanskrit in very old Nepalese manu-76
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
research into the causes and conditions influencing manuscript
corruption is needed, especially for the earlier, more carefully copied
manuscripts, some of the readings of which might be more easily or
more confidently restored when the broader palette of causes of
corruption is taken into consideration. Both specific and overarching
paleographic studies of Indian and Nepalese scripts are desiderata,
the results of which will greatly contribute to our knowledge of the
evolution of the scripts and possibly aid in the dating of
manuscripts.⁹5 As Isaacson has stated, ⁹6
96
scripts is handled with care and Sanskrit texts are copied correctly, or at least fairly
correctly, the Sanskrit in many younger bilingual manuscripts has often been
deplorably ill-treated. The glaring imperfections in manuscripts of this type betray,
in fact, a carelessness and a gradual deterioration in the knowledge of Sanskrit that
are unparalleled."
95 Certainly also of importance in the context of a discussion on causes of textual
corruption is the consideration of the spoken and written language(s) of the scribes.
J. Brough (1996: 132ff.) adverts his reader to the idiosyncrasies of Newar scribes,
among which may be found the introduction of Newari spellings for Sanskrit words
which have been incorporated into the Newari language, e.g., Skt. janma spelled
janma, jalma, jarlma, jarnma, jarmma, jamma, jartma or jatma, and the application
of stylistic features occurring in written Nepalese script, the most prominent being
the overuse, or perhaps rather the ornamental usage, of superscript r. Regarding
superscript r Brough (ibid., 133) writes: “Since the following consonant regularly
doubled, a bond seems to have been established between a double consonant and a
superscript r, and as a result any double consonant may attract to itself a superscript
r. The alternations of spellings with and without the r then would seem to have led to
its occasional use over other conjuncts and even over single consonants, and to its
equally frequent omission where it is historically required; and it is difficult to avoid
the impression that the sign was felt to be a mere ornament of the handwriting –
perhaps playing a similar prestige role to that of the b in doubt or the c in scissors
when these spellings were first introduced into our own orthography.” Brough also
lists i and ī; u and ū; ṛ and ri; e, ya and ye; o, va and vo; ja and ya; jña and gya; ța
and ta; ra and la; sa and sa; șa and kha; kṣa, cha, khya and kha as orthographical
variants. It is possible that some of the variants found in the mss A-N which are
difficult to explain from a purely graphic point of view could be traced to Nepali- or
Newari-speaking scribes at some point in the manuscript tradition who understood
some, or even a good deal, of the Sanskrit they were copying, and who inadvertently
applied Newari spellings to words also found in the Newari language. Mention
should also be made here of the use of the two-dot visarga used in Newari-language
manuscripts as a punctuation marker; the regular visarga is sometimes distinguished
from it by being formed with two circles or a figure 8 (see Brough 1996: 140). This
usage, as might be expected, creeps into Sanskrit manuscripts being copied byPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
77
While the usage of European medieval scribes has been studied
intensively and the types of errors which they are prone to
commit analysed, similar studies for Sanskrit (and other Indic)
manuscripts are rare and, in view especially of the immense
quantity and variety of material, inadequate. Of course many
classes of mistakes are common to European and Indian
scribes, being simply such as any human will inevitably
sometimes fall into when copying a text, bhrānteḥ
puruṣadharmatvāt. But there are significant differences none
the less; in general the Indian situation is much more complex,
with large variation in scribal usage according to region and
period, and with many more varieties of script to be dealt with.
The publications of facsimiles and diplomatic transcriptions of
Indic manuscripts should be encouraged to facilitate further
study of these and other codicological and palaeographical
questions.
All corrections within the paper manuscripts A-N have been carried
out by the scribes themselves, not by a proofreader. Most of the
scribes write a dropped akṣara or word above or below the line and
indicate with a kakapada its insertion point. Ms B occasionally
frames the dropped aksaras with an "X" on each side and also
sometimes writes the dropped akṣaras in the upper or lower margin,
indicating the place of insertion by writing the line number beside the
marginal addition and a kakapada at the intended point of insertion.
Mss B, C, J and N exhibit a tendency to metathesis and correct the
errors by placing the number "1" over the akṣara that should be in
first position and the number “2” over the akṣara to be read second.
Where the metathesis is of two words, the extent of each word is
marked with short vertical lines and the respective number written
above the word. Cancellation of akṣaras is usually indicated by way
of two or three dots above the akṣaras. Ms J's scribe on occasion
draws a short diagonal line through or attached to single akṣaras or
parts thereof; the scribe of ms N often does not cognize that these
Newar scribes, and may explain, for example, ms H's tendency to present forms like
itiḥ and ms F's presentation of bruvateḥ in the phrase apare tu bruvate.
96 Isaacson 1995: 44f., n. 119.78
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
strokes are cancellation markers and copies the cancelled errors into
his manuscript. Dropped lines are usually enclosed between two
"X"s and written under the final line of text, their insertion points
marked with smaller "x"s or kakapadas.
Manuscript Relationships
As shown by the Stemma diagram (p. 88), the relationships between
the older manuscripts are slightly more complex than those of the
more recent ones. In order to determine the relationship between the
palm-leaf manuscripts P and Q as well as P's and Q's relationships
with the paper manuscripts, it was also necessary to consider the
testimony of the Tibetan translation of the PsP. Its relevance for the
establishment of the upper levels of the stemma was immediately
evident in the particular readings ms Q shares with the Tibetan
translation but not with ms P.
Prior to analysis, the fact that ms Q and the Tibetan translation have
common readings not shared by ms P suggested that Q might be
more reliable than P in these instances, and that where Q attests a
word, phrase or sentence not found in P but for which the Tibetan
translation attests an equivalent, one might be justified in inferring
that the same word, phrase or sentence had dropped from P due to
scribal oversight. Indeed, in a number of instances these general
assumptions proved to be grounded and correct, but it was clear that
it would have been ill-advised to accept and apply them globally and
without reflection. My suspicions regarding some of Q's and the
Tibetan translation's shared readings had in fact been raised even
before I had seen Dr. Yonezawa's meticulously documented hand-
copy of ms Q, when my only access to the manuscript readings was
via Koji Matsumoto's 2005 U. of Taishō B.A. thesis, in which he
reported many of Q's readings for the first third of the first chapter of
the PSP. In an article published in 2008 I expressed doubts about
whether ms Q's question and answer katham kṛtvā yasmād evam79
tenoktam, its question kim kāraṇam,"7 and two of its references to the
MA were integral to the text of the PsP, wondering in particular if the
latter references might have been inserted into Q's text or added as
marginalia to an earlier manuscript in Q's line and later incorporated
into the main text of a manuscript copied from it." These doubts
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
97
Cf. my earlier comments in MacDonald 2008: 26f.: “Of interest is the fact that Ms.
Q attests text for a few phrases and sentences not to be found in Ms. P but that do
occur in the Tibetan translation. Prior to learning of the existence of these readings
in Ms. Q, I had been unable to determine if the Tibetan translators had actually read
these phrases and sentences in their Sanskrit manuscript(s) or if they had
independently added them to their translation, justifying them as minor but helpful
syntactical additions and supplementary explanatory material. In most of the cases
the extra material is by no means vital to the text at least to the text as written for
Candrakīrti's intended audience. Ms. Q's attestation of the material now confirms
that the translators must have encountered the words and phrases in at least one of
the manuscripts at their disposal. I am not, however, at this point entirely convinced
that all of this material stems from Candrakīrti's hand, and more such instances will
have to located and analyzed for one to arrive at a more definite conclusion. While,
for instance, it is possible that the words katham kṛtvā yasmād evam tenoktam in the
passage in Ms. Q corresponding to LVP 19.8-20.2, viz. athāpy avasyam svato 'nu-
mānavirodhadoṣa udbhāvanīyaḥ || so 'py udbhāvita evācāryabuddhapālitena| ka-
tham kṛtvā yasmād evam tenoktam na svata utpadyante bhāvās tadutpāda-
vaiyarthyād iti vacanāt (text in bold not in LVP), may have dropped out of Ms. P (or
a manuscript before it) owing to an eyeskip from the ka of katham to the na of na
svata, the extra phrases make for a certain redundancy, especially since the
following vacanāt indicates that Buddhapālita has stated the contradiction with an
inference. The kim kāraṇam that appears in Ms. Q after the next sentence - and the
loss of which from Ms. P would be difficult to explain paleographically - likewise
seems unnecessary given that the following sentence begins with tathā hi."
98 Cf. MacDonald 2008: 27f.: "A more definite example for what appears to be
deliberate interference with the text exists for a section of a sentence that follows a
quotation from the Madhyamakāvatāra (see LVP 36.10): in Ms. P we read ... ityādinā
parata utpattipratiṣedho 'vaseyaḥ, whereas Ms. Q attests ityādinā parata utpatti-
pratiṣedho mādhyamakāvatārād aveśaḥ. The suspicion that the name of the text
here is most probably an interpolation is supported by an earlier passage also
containing a quotation from the Madhyamakāvatāra (see LVP 13.9), which in Ms. P
is followed by the words ityādināvaśeyā but in Ms. Q is followed by ityādinā
madhyamakāvatārādidvāreṇāvaseyā. That the Prasannapadā manuscript relied on
by the author of the *LȚ, like Ms. P, did not name the source of the quotation is
obvious from the fact that the *LȚ's author cites ityādinā (*LŢ: ityādineti) and then
glosses it with a compound identifying the source, i.e., madhyamakāvatāra-
granthena.... Many later students of the Prasannapadā would not have been as
familiar with the contents of the Madhyamakāvatāra, and so its title was added,80
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
increased when the hand-copy of Q revealed that the question and
answer katham kṛtvā yasmād evam tenoktam, the question kim
kāraṇam, and the first of the two MA references were not found in
Q's main text, but were rather written in Q's margins, marked to be
inserted at the appropriate spot in the main text. The discussion
below takes as its primary focus these and other suspect marginal
notations, and further dubious material within Q's main text, most of
it attested by the Tibetan.
Of course, were both ms Q and the manuscripts relied on for the
Tibetan translation to belong to a different transmission line than ms
P, P's lack of the above and other specific textual material attested by
Q and the Tibetan would at least be partially explained. My analysis
of all of P's and Q's textual variants for the first chapter of the PSP
and comparison of their respective text with the Tibetan translation,
however, revealed that both ms P and ms Q ultimately descend from
the same hyparchetype (ms ß; see Stemma), and that the Tibetan
translation was at least in part, and in many of the pertinent cases,
related to Sanskrit text descending from another hyparchetype (ms y).
One scenario that was suggested by these relationships was that the
material in question shared by Q and the Tibetan translation had been
attested by ms ß but was dropped by P's scribe; in the case of Q's
above-mentioned marginal questions and MA reference, for example,
it would have to be assumed that exactly the same material had by
chance been dropped by both P's and Q's scribes, but was later
returned to the PSP text by Q's proofreader. Tentatively supportive of
the hypothesis that the material shared by Q and the Tibetan
translation had dropped from the main text of P, and in a few cases
from both P and Q, was the fact that some, but not all, of the relevant
material Q shared with the Tibetan is attested by the later “better”
paper manuscripts, which also ultimately descend from ß. The first
main problem encountered by this scenario, however, was that P's
hypothesized loss of the relevant material was often difficult to
explain from a paleographical and/or logical point of view. The
either in Ms. Q or in an earlier manuscript in its line, in the latter case possibly as
marginalia that was later incorporated directly into the text. I expect that the same
thing has occurred in the other passage above where Ms. Q identifies the Madhya-
makāvatāra as the source of the citation but Ms. P does not."PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
81
subsequent consideration that this material-as I had proposed for
the readings discussed in the 2008 article-in fact did not represent
text dropped by P's scribe, i.e., had never been part of P's text, called
for contemplation of the possibility that it had also not been in P's
exemplar, or in ms ß either. But if it had not been in ß, how could its
appearance in Q's main text and margins be explained?
Further analysis and reflection led to the conclusion that the material
in question had indeed not been included in ms ß's text, and had
instead entered ß's line of descent to Q from an external source. This
brings us to the distinguishing feature of ms Q (or at least of ms Q's
first chapter): A number of the words, phrases and sentences in Q's
main text and margins—those in the latter seeming to supply material
for the oversights of ms Q's scribe-which at first glance appear to
be integral to the text of the ß lineage and were assumed to be
traceable back to ß, have their origins in at least one, I presume two,
PsP manuscripts from the y line. To be more specific, ms Q contains
readings from the hyparchetype ß as well as from 1) a manuscript
(ms 8) which attests readings different from those of ß owing to its
descent from y, and into which new readings had been introduced,
many of which were passed on to a manuscript descending from ß to
Q (= ms n), and from 2) a manuscript (ms 0) which had received, in
addition to the earlier readings and interpolations in its line (viz.,
those in 8), a few new readings that were passed on to Q when it (ms
0) was read against Q during the writing of Q or sometime after Q
had been copied from Q's exemplar.⁹⁹ Q's line has thus experienced
contamination. To put it another way: Certain circumspect scribes
and/or scholars in Q's line, whether because they were aware of
problems in the text of the manuscript at hand or of different readings
99
I assume two instances of contamination because, to give one example, one of the
marginal additions in Q contains a citation that would surely have been included in
the Tibetan translation had it been attested in one of the Sanskrit manuscripts used
by Pa tshab. While the Tibetan translation does include the Tibetan equivalent for
the interpolated citation utpādād vā tathāgatānām anutpādād vā tathāgatānāṁ sthi-
taivaiṣā dharmāṇāṁ dharmatā, it does not contain the citation kāmābhāvaḥ param
sukham, which in Q immediately follows the former. Further, the fact that much of
Q's extraneous material has already been incorporated into Q's main text, as well as
the existence of many variant readings (and scribal errors) in Q's main text, suggests
that numerous readings from y's line were already in Q's exemplar.82
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
in other manuscripts, or of both, or because it was common pro-
cedure for them to check for alternative readings, sought out
additional manuscripts of the PsP for the sake of comparison, and
emended and supplemented the PsP's text in reliance on the new
readings.
It is fortunate that ms Q itself, and not a copy of it, is the manuscript
in present-day Lhasa which was copied by Yonezawa, because Q's
margins provide a snapshot of elements from the second wave of
contaminating influences (i.e., from ms 0) "caught in the act," even
though they inasmuch as each, alongside the other akṣaras
legitimately dropped from Q's text but recovered by the scribe, is
adorned with numbers indicating the respective line for insertion-
initially give the impression of being nothing more than simple
scribal oversights. Had the Lhasa manuscript been a copy of Q, these
elements would surely have been integrated into this copy's main
text, and less easily unmasked and identified as yet another group of
interpolations. The marginal material indeed attracts the editor's
attention by its placement and the fact that its akṣaras often constitute
complete words, phrases, and even sentences.
Evidence of contamination in Q of course does not necessarily imply
that the text received from manuscripts other than Q's ß-line
exemplar is foreign to the PsP, and it is only the careful consideration
of each variant that allows us to decide whether a reading should be
included in the critical edition. My allocation of some of the readings
shared by Q and the Tibetan translation to the variant level might be
objected to on the ground that the Tibetan translation is older than
both P and Q and thus likely to contain more reliable, original
readings. At this point it is prudent to recall that Pa tshab nyi ma
grags reports in the colophon to his translation that the Tibetan
version of the PSP was made in reliance on two Sanskrit manuscripts:
1) a Kashmiri manuscript in dependence on which he and his pandita
collaborator and advisor Mahāsumati produced the translation in
Kashmir toward the end of the eleventh century, and 2) a manuscript
from nyi 'og shar (eastern Aparānta)¹⁰⁰ which he, together with the
100 The area designated as Nyi 'og remains unclear. Erb (1997: 114, n. 125) notes
that Tāranātha states that Bhang ga la and O ḍi vi śa belong to eastern Aparānta.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
83
Kashmiri pandita Kanakavarman, used to revise the translation in
Lhasa in the early twelfth century. We can infer from this double-
checking that concerns about the accuracy of the transmitted text of
the PSP were already present in the minds of Pa tshab and his
collaborators; a second manuscript would not have been consulted
had they not encountered problematic readings in the first. The
Tibetan translation is thus in one sense a critical edition, or, in less
favourable terminology, is also contaminated, containing readings, it
would seem, derived from two transmission lines of the PSP.101 Pa
tshab's and Kanakavarman's excellent knowledge of Sanskrit and
close familiarity with Madhyamaka thought would have insured that
any problematic words and phrases in the Kashmir-made version of
the PSP translation were emended when it was reworked in Lhasa,
but as is also often the case with modern editors, decisions for or
against the unique readings found in one of the manuscripts may not
always have been clear-cut, with the result that some original.
material was elided, or erroneously altered, and extraneous material
was introduced.
Given that, as stated, many of ms Q's interpolations are reflected in
the Tibetan translation, it can be inferred that both ultimately
received these from the same manuscript(s). For the sake of
convenience I make ms 8 the source of both Q's and the Tibetan
translation's extra readings (see Stemma), but I expect that the
process of transmission was more complicated, i.e., involved more
manuscripts. At this stage of research I speculate that only one of the
two Sanskrit manuscripts relied on by Pa tshab and his collaborators
bore all of the extra readings (i.e., I do not presume that each
contained some), but I am unable to hypothesize whether the
transmitter of the interpolations was the Kashmiri manuscript or the
Aparānta manuscript.
101 Although the Tibetan translation contains many of Q's interpolations, it also often
supports ms P's readings against those of ms Q.
102 There is one hint in Pa tshab's PsP commentary (Tshig gsal ba’i dka’ ba bshad pa)
which points to the transmitter of the extra material possibly being the Aparānta
manuscript checked in Lhasa. Pa tshab informs his readers there that at the PsP's
initial reference to the connection, subject matter, and purpose (sambandhābhidheya-84
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
Those of us who have worked with the Tibetan translation of the PSP
would without hesitation agree that Pa tshab and his collaborators
produced a fine and highly reliable rendering of the work, definitely
praiseworthy among the translations of the second diffusion of
Buddhist literature into Tibet, but awareness of the Tibetan trans-
lation's editorial history ought to deter uncritical appropriation of its
readings when the Sanskrit text of the PSP is missing or obscure, and
restrain one in particularly unfounded cases-from arguing for
peculiar material in the available manuscripts solely on the basis of
the translation's support, especially when arguments for the mater-
ial's being foreign to Candrakīrti's composition and reasons for its
suspected interpolation are readily available.103 The discovery that the
Tibetan translation contains readings from more than one Sanskrit
manuscript of the PSP forces the editor investigating the alternative
readings in the available manuscripts of the Sanskrit text to proceed
with extreme care and to seek out evidence beyond that immediately
at hand.
Some of the changes and accretions that were introduced to ancestors
of the Kashmiri or Aparānta manuscript may now defy discovery,
especially when text in our most important point of comparison ms P
prayojanāni) of the MMK, the Kashmiri manuscript reads merely prayojanāni
(correct reading), whereas the Aparānta manuscript reads °prayojanatatprayojanāni
(incorrect reading, the result of determined change) (Tshig gsal ba'i dka' ba bshad
pa, fol. 56b6f.: kha che’i dpe la de’i dgos pa ces bya pa med pas de’i lan yang dkyus
las mi gsal la| rgya dpe la yod pas de'i lan yang shugs las 'debs so ). The reading
prayojanatatprayojanāni is exactly the (incorrect) reading attested by the paper
manuscripts, transmitted to them from ms 8. Ms Q reads (incorrectly and as a result
of determined change) prayojanaprayojana, causing one to wonder if tat of the paper
manuscripts was a later explanatory addition or if Q (or ms n) accidentally dropped
the tat. While the Aparānta manuscript may not have contained exactly the same
reading as the one received by Q from 8, the desire of a scribe/scholar to bring in the
later, i.e., post-Candrakīrti, concept of the "purpose of the purpose" has affected
both. If the Aparānta manuscript did contain the extra material found in Q, this
would mean that the interpolations were brought into the Tibetan translation only
when it was revised in Lhasa. My thanks to Chizuko Yoshimizu for the Tshig gsal
ba'i dka' ba bshad pa reference.
103 One should also note that citations, as I have explained elsewhere (MacDonald
2015), were not translated from the Sanskrit but were copied in from the Tibetan
translations of their source texts. They are therefore not necessarily trustworthy
witnesses for the restoration of the majority of the PsP's Sanskrit citations.85
is missing or damaged. It is also possible that foreign material had
already accumulated before the copying of ms ß, or even before ms
a, which can make its alien nature more difficult to detect. Ms ß
must, for example, have contained the reading sankleśavyavadāna-
nibandhanam1¹04 (in a passage referring to things being the cause of
defilement of beings) for it to appear in P, Q and the paper manu-
scripts, but as I argue, vyavadāna must be an accretion, because it
does not make sense in the context, having surely been added by a
scribe or scholar who was influenced by the usage of both sanklesa
and vyavadāna in a compound in an earlier sentence (sankleśavyava-
dānanibandhanam); it does not appear in the Tibetan translation and
was thus presumably not attested by ms y.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
But how do we explain the fact that the paper manuscripts, which like
P and Q descend from ß, attest a few of the readings found in Q-
such as the first reference to the MA-that can only be a result of Q's
contamination from the y line? Given that the paper manuscripts do
not descend from Q, it has to be concluded that their most immediate
common ancestor ms ɩ, like Q, was read against a manuscript from
the y line (again for the sake of convenience indicated in the Stemma
as ms 8) which contained the interpolated readings, 105 and that some
of these were added to ms ɩ and passed on to its descendants. Ms t's
adoption of readings from its second manuscript, viz., ms 8, was
much more limited than ms n's and that of the manuscript used for
the Tibetan translation: the paper manuscripts lack, for instance, the
sentences katham kṛtvā yasmād evam tenoktam, the question kim
kāraṇam, and numerous other insertions attested by ms Q. The fact
that some of the readings in the paper manuscripts and the Tibetan
translation only appear in Q's margins, that is, have not been
integrated into Q's main text, means that they must have entered ms
Q during the second wave of contamination, by way of ms 0, which
would seem to indicate, at least on the basis of the stemma as I have
reconstructed it, that even though ms and the Tibetan translation
received these specific readings from ms 8, ms Q did not,
104 See the final sentence of PSPM $77.
105 It is of course possible that ms ɩ was read against an already contaminated
manuscript of the ß line.86
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
presumably because ms n's scribe did not appropriate all of d's
readings (thus their non-appearance in ms Q's main text), and that
they reached Q only when Q was collated against ms 0.106
The sole extant manuscript not affected by influence from the y line,
namely ms P, has not, however, escaped contamination from another
corner: As could be discerned from the unique errors it shares, on the
one hand, with ms Q, and on the other, with the paper manuscripts, P
has received readings from two descendants of the hyparchetype ß,
namely, mss & and C. Since neither of these have been affected by the
y line, the contamination in P's case is usually less disturbing than
that in Q's,¹ 107 but its presence needs to be kept in mind; editorial
decisions have been aided by the fact that manuscripts stemming
from both of P's sources, viz., Q, which is a descendant of ms , and
the main paper manuscripts, descendants of ms e, could be consulted.
The diagram on p. 88 depicts the relationships of the manuscripts
relied on for my critical edition of the PsP's first chapter text, as well
as these manuscripts' relationships with relevant non-extant,
hypothesized manuscripts. I am aware of two other stemmata: 1) the
stemma presented by de Jong (1979: 542) for de La Vallée Poussin's
three manuscripts (my L, M and N) and ms D, and 2) that set forth by
Kragh (2006: 63) for ms P and the mss B, D, J and L (the four
“better” paper manuscripts) used for his edition of PsP chapter
seventeen on MMK XVII.1-20. Kragh's analysis of the variants for
chapter seventeen substantiates the stemma presented earlier by me
(see Kragh 2006: 63) but, in Kragh's opinion, appears to indicate that
ms J has some minor contamination. 108 I have not found any clear
evidence on the basis of the PSP chapter one variants for additional
106 Ms 0 was not the source of ms t's extra readings because it had unique readings
found neither in the Tibetan translation nor in the paper manuscripts.
107 Since I only have access to chapter one of the hand-copy of ms Q, I am unable to
determine if the determined change found in a few of ms P's MMK verses can be
traced back to ms.
108 Cf. Kragh 2006: 63-67 as well as the second stemma Kragh (ibid., 68) presents,
which shows contamination of J via a manuscript that also passed on readings to ms
P (his ms ɛ). The evidence for contamination that Kragh presents is rather sparse and
his hypothesis would require confirmation from other chapters of the PSP.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
87
contamination in J—that is, other than that from ms 8, which occurs
in all the paper manuscripts—and am thus not (yet) convinced by
Kragh's hypothesis. It goes without saying that my depiction of the
stemma, especially of the manuscripts of its upper regions,
(intentionally) simplifies what must have been a much more complex
web of manuscripts and relationships between manuscripts.
Stemma Key
Bold sigla with grey shading: extant palm-leaf manuscripts
Bold sigla without shading: main extant paper manuscripts
Broken lines indicate contamination; arrows indicate the direction of
the contamination.88
E
L
B
P
K
B
G
m
2
C
M
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
J
Stemma
a
N K
F
L
Y
8
0
E
Tibetan
translation,
D
A H
IPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
112
The relationships between the paper manuscripts were fairly easy to
determine owing to the fact that the majority of these manuscripts
settle into two main manuscript "families."109 Only the palm-leaf
manuscripts P and Q and the paper manuscripts B and D find
themselves outside the family groups, although B and D relate, like
the main manuscripts of the two families, namely, mss J and L, back
to ms ɩ. A perusal of the variants shows that the family J consists of
mss C, G, J, M and N, and that the family L consists of mss A, E, F,
H, I, K and L. Mss C, G, J, M and N, for example, all omit uttaram
and lack ādheyavacanaḥ kecicchabdaparyāyaḥ, whereas all the other
manuscripts attest these words. Mss A, E, F, H, I, K and L all omit
anānārtham¹¹² and the words cakṣuḥ and pratītyam.1¹³ Another clear
indication of the separation of the families is found in A, E, F, H, I, K
and L's omission of the two words kim tarhy and in C, G, J, M and
N's recording of these same words as ki tahy.114
110
89
113
That ms J is the superior witness for its family is obvious from the
numerous instances in which it provides the sole correct reading for
109 Here and throughout the following discussion I use the words "family" and
"families." This usage should not imply a lack of awareness of the criticisms and
shortcomings of aspects of, particularly, Karl Lachmann’s “genealogical method,” or
of those of the system set forth by Lachmann's main apologist Paul Maas, namely,
among other criticisms, that the methods do not allow for horizontal “cross-
fertilization" via conflation or contamination, do not allow for the possibility of
authorial revision, etc.; see, for instance, Tanselle 1990: 305-311; Reynolds and
Wilson 1974: 192-194; Greetham 1992: 323-325. I use the words "family" and
"families" because they capture and make clear the close relatedness within
themselves of two prominent manuscript groups, i.e., the J group and the L group:
the manuscript evidence leaves no doubt that all second and third level manuscripts
of each group derive originally from respectively J or L. (None of these manuscripts
show signs of horizontal cross-fertilization amongst themselves, although all have
been affected by the contamination passed on to them by ms λ [received over K from
ms t].) The fact that the manuscripts within each group are closely related both in
time and geographical space only further justifies the employment of the term
"family."
110 See PSPM §18, verse.
111 See PSPM $20.
112 See PSPM §3, verse.
113 See end of PsPM §7.
114 See PSPM $71, penultimate sentence.90
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
the family. Mss C, G and M can be grouped together on the basis of
their common omissions, insertions and errors. C, G and M share
numerous omissions that do not occur in J; for example, they omit the
second prati where prati prati is attested in J,1¹5 omit nivartayeyam¹16
and repeat hrasvam prāpya,117 and all three attest angīkṛtārthavipa for
angīkṛtārthaviseṣa.118 A telling passage for their relatedness occurs
with the recording of an error that J's scribe has committed but then
attempts to correct: instead of writing cetyaśabde cakṣuḥ he writes
catyacakṣuśabdeḥ, but seeing his reversal of the last two words,
marks the extent of cakṣu with short vertical lines and writes the
number "2" over it, then does the same for śabde, writing over it the
number "1." These numbers are, however, overlooked when J is used
as exemplar for the C, G and M group: all three attest the uncorrected
version catyacakṣuśabdeh.
119
That G has not been used as the exemplar for C or M can be inferred
from the many deviant readings in it which are not repeated in C or
M. ¹20 Ms G omits, for example, the word kāraṇam that both C and M
attest,121 and the words yavad ye sutrāntāḥ, attested by both C and
M.¹22 Ms M also presents many readings which preclude its having
been used as the exemplar for either C or G; it omits, for example, a
tad123 and then later a tathā ¹24 attested by all the other manuscripts,
and introduces errors such as svabhāto for svato. Ms C, however,
125
115 See PSPM §8, second view presented in PP citation.
116 See PSPM §48, VV citation. See also their extensive dropping of material at PSPM
§28, beginning.
117 See PSPM $14.
118 See PSPM §7, sentence beginning angīkṛtārthaviseșe 'pi sambhavati.
11⁹ See PSPM §7, sentence beginning taddhitānte cetyaśabde cakṣuḥ. The correction,
like all other such corrections in ms J, is written in the scribe's own hand, and is not
a later addition.
120 See, e.g., māhātmyaṇ for sāmyam at PsP §49, first sentence.
M
121 See PSPM §65, MMK VIII.4ab.
122 See PSPM $74 (C and M both attest ya for ye).
123 See PSPM $41, MMK XVIII.10ab.
124 See PSPM $50, sentence beginning ko hi bhavatām abhipreto 'tra.
125
See PSPM $48, sentence beginning athākāśaguṇo grhyate.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
91
does not have omissions which are not also shared by G and M, and
since both G and M share the mistakes of C, and add to these
mistakes and to the correct readings in C their own individual
errors, it can be concluded that G and M descend from C.
126
Ms N also descends from J but it does not share C's omissions and
errors, etc. It instead attests numerous other omissions and adds
many new errors of its own to the textual transmission. No other
manuscripts used for this study share these peculiar drops and errors
and thus this particular transmission lineage ends with N.
Ms L, like J, often offers the single correct reading for its entire
family, which allows for the conclusion that A, E, F, H, I and K stem
from L. The manuscript family based on L breaks down into two sub-
families. One is constituted by mss F and K, the other by A, E, H and
I. Mss F and K frequently share errors, such as pratīmanupādaḥ
instead of L's pratītyasamutpādaḥ,127 and omissions, for example, the
dropping of the words na prakṛto,128 which do not occur in A, E, H or
I. Ms F can be seen to stem from K in that it shares K's errors and
additionally brings its own peculiar errors and lacunae to the text.129
The same phenomena occur in the A, E, H and I sub-family. Mss A,
E, H and I share errors, for example, bhavām for bhāvānām,
and
omissions, for example, (with the exception of one word) an entire
sentence, which the other manuscripts do not. Mss A, H and I all
attest their own peculiar separative errors and omissions ¹32 that are
130
131
126 See, e.g., See PSPM $50, sentence beginning ko hi bhavatām abhipreto 'tra, where
abhipreto has been recorded in C as ehipratā, copied as ehipratā in G, and been
further corrupted by M's scribe into ehipraptā.
127 See PSPM §3, sentence beginning tad atrānirodhādyaṣṭaviśeṣaṇavišiṣṭaḥ.
128 See PSP §41, Śālistambasūtra citation.
M
12⁹ See, e.g., ms F's extensive lacuna in the homage verse at PSPM §16-17, starting
with the second word of the sentence beginning yathābhihitaviseṣaṇasya.
130 See PSPM §6, last sentence.
131 See PSPM §29, starting with punarutpādānapekṣaṇ in the paragraph commencing
iha svātmanā vidyamānam.
132 See, e.g., ms A's extensive lacuna at PsP §39, starting with caitanyavat of the
sentence commencing prayogavākyaṇ; ms H’s omission of paraprasiddhena at PSPM92
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
not repeated in E or in each other and therefore cannot have served as
exemplars for each other. The errors and omissions of ms E, on the
other hand, do appear in A, H and I, allowing for the conclusion that
these latter three stem from E.
133
Mss J and L contain shared errors, but neither derives from the other
because both contain their own individual errors and omissions. Ms
L, for example, fails to present a substantial part of a sentence ¹3³ that
does appear in its entirety in ms J, and J omits, for example, the
words te 'vocan,¹34 both of which occur in L. The numerous common
errors they exhibit and indicative passages such as the long repeated
section of text they share, ¹35 against B, D, P and Q, point to their
stemming from ms λ.
Ms B cannot have served as the exemplar for J and L because, even
though it presents many of J and L's shared errors, it has particular
errors, such as ubhayo for ubhayato,' 136 and omissions that do not
occur in J or L, such as the loss of an entire quotation along with part
of the following quotation. 137 It also cannot have descended from ms
because it does not attest specific omissions and dittographies
found in both J and L which must have been present in λ. The
common errors of B, J and L, however, that are not to be found in D,
Por Q, do suggest that ms B and ms λ descend from ms ê.
138
While ms D does present errors that are also common to B, J and L, it
cannot have been ms к because it has numerous errors and, on
§57, second sentence of reply; ms I's extensive drop at PsPM §30, starting with
punarabhivyaktim.
133 See PSPM §76, starting with pratītyabhāvānāṇ of the sentence commencing yas tu
viparyāsānugamān.
134 See PSPM §78, paragraph commencing atha teṣām pañcānām bhikṣuśatānām.
135 See PSPM §79, starting with chandarāgaparyavasthitena of the paragraph com-
mencing tadyathā bhagavan sa puruṣo 'satsamāropeṇa.
136 See See PSPM §63, PP citation.
137 See PSPM §72, starting with etad dhi bhikṣavaḥ.
138 See, e.g., PSPM $94, beginning of response. B, J and L drop ucyate and then
include it in the long dittography-not attested in the other manuscripts—which
follows. Note also the dittography in all three at PSPM §95, first sentence of response
(dittography starts with svalakṣaṇasya).93
139
. 140
occasion, omissions, such as the loss of yan na labhyate, and
repetitions¹ that do not appear in any one of the other three. D also
cannot have descended from ê due to the fact that it does not contain
many of the errors shared by B, J and L, such as, for example, two
long dittographies ¹41 that must have existed in K. D's uniqueness and
the errors it shares with B, J and L suggest that both D and ê descend
from ms .
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
144
Ms P cannot have been among the earlier sequence of manuscripts
ms D descends from because P presents a number of errors not found
in D, such as uparggena for upasargena¹42 and the loss of bhavanti.143
Ms P further presents instances of determined textual change,¹ none
of which appear in D or the rest of the paper manuscripts that can all
be traced back to ms . Ms P cannot descend from ms because it
does not contain certain errors shared by all the paper manuscripts,
for example, paramārthaḥ (attested in A-N) for its paramārthataḥ¹45
or the loss of santraset from all of the better paper manuscripts, i.e.,
from B, D, J and L.146
Ms Q cannot be ms because it has numerous errors and omissions
that do not occur in D or the other paper manuscripts, such as a long
eyeskip involving two sentences (including the end and beginning of
the respectively previous and following sentences).¹47 Ms Q cannot
descend from ms because it does not contain certain errors shared
139 See PSPM §76, Ratnakūṭasūtra citation, second sentence.
140 See, e.g., PsP₁ §78, starting with deśayati in the fourth sentence (yam hi
bhagavān...) in the paragraph commencing atha tāni pañca bhikṣuśatāni.
141 See n. 138.
142 See PSPM §6, verse.
143 See PSPM $77, end.
144 Cf. infra, ms P description; MacDonald 2000: 168f.
145 See PSPM $52, final inference.
146 See PSPM §79, in the sentence starting sa tatra mānasam paridāham sañjānīyād in
the paragraph commencing yathā cāham bhagavan.
147 See PSPM §39, starting with utpannāni of the PP citation.94
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
by all the paper manuscripts, for example, pramāṇam (A-N) for
praṇāmam ¹48 and vivarjitas (A-M; N: vivarjjitas) for vivaksitas. 149
Mss P and Q have errors in common but neither descends from the
other because both have numerous unique errors and omissions. Ms
P, for example, attests the readings canye for canena, 150 and
vigatāvidyātaimirāṇām sarvajñānām viṣaye svabhāvāpekṣyayā for
vigatāvidyātimirānāsravajñānaviṣayasvabhāvāpekṣayā, 151 the latter
presented correctly as a single compound by ms Q, and has dropped
words such as tāni. 152 Ms Q, on the other hand, has lost, among
others, the words na tv asti¹ and the two full sentences mentioned
above,154 which are attested by ms P, and presents many erroneous
readings, such as sasvabhāvabhāvavāda for sasvabhāvavāda 155 and
ke for kena.156
:153
The fact that mss P, Q and i have common errors, such as yathā for
yadā,157 and share additions, such as vyavadāna¹58 (and the probably
interpolated verse etymologizing the word sastra), 159 as well as
losses, such as of the words ahetutaḥ,160 siddhasādhanam161 and
vyavahāra, 162 indicates that P, Q and i descend from the hyparchetype
148 See PSPM §3, just before MMK I.1.
149 See PSPM §8, in the sentence commencing tenedānīm prāpya sambhavaḥ.
150 See PsPM §52, beginning.
151 See PSPM $71, third sentence from end.
152 See PSPM $34, first word of the sentence commencing tāni ca vyākhyāyamānāni.
153 See PSPM §143, introduction to MMK I.7.
154 See n. 147.
155 See PSPM §82, first sentence of response.
156 See PSPM $86, objection.
157 See PSPM §48, response (na caitad evam), second word of the sentence beginning
tad yadā.
158 See PSPM $77, final sentence.
159 See PSPM §2.
160 See PSPM §83, end.
161 See PSPM §27, response to Sankhya/PP objection.
162 See PSPM $117.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
ß. Accordingly, the fact that the Tibetan translation does not have
these or certain other errors, additions and losses common to P, Q
and allows us to postulate that these changes were not in hyparche-
type y.
L
:167
Ms P contains another group of errors that it shares only with the
paper manuscripts, i.e, not with ms Q, such as the wrong readings
svataḥ (Q has the correct reading tat),163 astitvam (Q is correct with
năstitvam);¹64 P and the paper manuscripts also share correct
readings, such as cāham (Q's nāham is incorrect). 165 On the other
hand, both P and Q, against the paper manuscripts and the Tibetan
translation, present MMK IV.1ab where MMK IV.2ab is expected.166
P and Q have also dropped, for example, the words karmāṇi ¹67 and
vā,168 which are attested by the paper manuscripts and the Tibetan
translation. P must therefore have received readings from two
sources: one that passed its errors, etc., on to the pair P and ɩ, as well
as one whose errors are found in the pair P and Q. Ms P thus contains
readings from both ms & and ms . Given that ms P was checked by a
proofreader against its exemplar, and that all of the problematic
readings are written directly in P's text, it seems likely that the
readings from ms & and ms were already in P's exemplar. For the
sake of the stemma's transparency, however, I have not included a
separate sigla that would represent P's exemplar.
95
Ms Q, in attesting a number of the mistakes that both P and 1 (= the
paper manuscripts) do, clearly belongs to the group of manuscripts in
B's descending line, but it also, as stated earlier, presents in its main
text and in its margins a number of extra readings found only in the
Tibetan translation. Ms Q and the Tibetan translation exclusively
163 See PSPM §29, response, sentence commencing atra hi tad.
164 See PSPM $104, end.
166
165 See PSPM $79, first sentence of second paragraph of citation (yathā cāham
bhagavan)
See PSPM
§36.
167 See PSPM §76, objection, second instance of karmāṇi.
168 See PSPM §83, response, end (sentence commencing kuto vaiṣām sankhyā)96
MANUSCRIPT DESCRIPTION
169
share, among others, the reading kṛtakatvānityatvāt, three refer-
ences to the MA,170 and extra citations. ¹71 The non-occurrence of
these readings in mss P and ɩ, the fact that it is easy to explain why
they were included, and especially the unacceptability of the citations
point to their absence from ß and their entry into the PsP manuscript
tradition via the y line. It is less probable that they originated in the
→Q line and were passed on from this line to a manuscript feeding
the Tibetan translation because with this scenario Q would receive all
the additional and unacceptable material in question directly from its
exemplar and as a result would attest it only within its main text and
not partially in its margins. The origin of the first wave of material
from a manuscript outside the ß line has therefore been postulated as
ms 8. Ms 8 thus represents a manuscript in y's descending line that
carried the interpolated readings and passed them on to the Tibetan
translation and in part, to Q (one expects that in reality more than one
manuscript was involved). In order to show that the first wave of
contamination from the y line into the ß line occurred pre-Q, ms î is
posited as the recipient of the readings from ms 8; ms ŋ in turn
donated its own text along with the extraneous material to Q.
Given that, as just explained, some of ms Q's foreign material occurs
in its margins and not in its main text and thus could not have been
included in ms ŋ, we are led to posit ms 0 as the donor of this
material. That much of the same foreign material is attested by the
Tibetan, however, indicates that this text may have been attested by
ms 8 but was not taken over when ms ŉ appropriated other words,
phrases and sentences from ms 8's text. Alternatively, it entered a
manuscript closely related to ms 8 and from here reached the Tibetan
translation; for the sake of convenience, ms d is made the source of
the extra material in the Tibetan translation. Further material such as
the quotation kāmābhāvaḥ param sukham, which is included in ms
Q's marginal material but does not appear in the Tibetan translation
169 See PSPM $29, first sentence of the paragraph commencing tatra yathānityaḥ (PsP
Tib: byas pa mi rtag pa'i phyir).
170 See PSPM $21, end; §61, end; §104, end of response.
171 See PSPM §74, where the Akṣayamatisūtra's statement in which the topics of
neyārthasūtras has been added.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
(or in the paper manuscripts), was presumably added to a descendant
of ms 8 after the Tibetan translation had been completed, and was
subsequently passed on to ms 0.
97
The paper manuscripts attest, but to a much lesser degree, some of
the readings shared by Q and the Tibetan translation, such as two
references to the MA and a couple of extraneous citations. ¹72 Ms U,
like ms Q, has thus experienced contamination from the y line. For
our purposes, this contamination is indicated as having its source in
ms 8.
172
173
Archetype a is posited as the ancestor of all of the extant copies of
the PSP. Where mss P, Q and all the paper manuscripts share the
error na for sa,' the Tibetan translation also attests a wrong
negation, which indicates that its exemplars were problematic at this
point, and probably also attested the negation na. MMK I.12c₂d is
missing from P, Q and all the paper manuscript and, as I argue, was
probably not in the exemplars used for the Tibetan translation or in
the original Tibetan translation. These problems indicate that ẞ and y
stem from a.
173
See PSPM $71, where an additional sūtra citation has been added after the
Udānavarga I.3 citation, and PSPM §112 (see note to the first word of the paragraph),
where the first two verses of CŚ XIII have been inserted.
See PSPM §28, response, sentence commencing sa cāyam param prati. The akṣara
in question in ms Q is not Q's usual na, but it is closer to a na than any other akṣara;
it definitely cannot be read as a sa.Sanskrit TextCritical Edition
Introduction
Editorial Policy: General
All of the variants in mss P, Q and the paper manuscripts ascribable
to scribal error and interpretation have been recorded in the critical
edition's (negative) apparatus.¹ The following types of variants have
generally not been recorded:
Gemination of consonants after a semi-vowel, e.g., dharmaḥ
written as dharmmaḥ, karma as karmma; kārya written as kāryya,
ārya as āryya, sarve as sarvve.
Reduction of double consonant to a single one before a semi-
vowel, e.g., tattvam written as tatvam; sattva written as satva.
Use of anusvāra for homorganic nasal and vice-versa, e.g.,
angaḥ/amgaḥ; kim tu / kin tu; pañca/pamca.
Non-application of sandhi.
Non-application of avagraha where the avagraha does not
indicate a deleted alpha privative.
Where a word or compound has been recorded in the apparatus
because it attests a variant other than one of these five types, any of
the five may occur elsewhere in the word or compound. The five
types of variants mentioned above have, of course, been recorded in
the diplomatic edition for ms P.
1
¹ A positive apparatus would have been preferable, but the critical text editing
program I started with (Collate) was, at the time, unable to deal with Sanskrit
compounds and had to be abandoned. The program used to format the present
edition (Classical Text Editor) only became available to me after I had established
the edition.102
CRITICAL EDITION
danda variants are mentioned only when they are relevant to the
constitution of the critical text.
Some philological comments which explain my emendations and
choice of readings have been included within the apparatus. The
reader is referred to the translation notes for explanations requiring
more detail.
Editorial Policy: Ms P and Ms Q
All errors of substance and all scribal errors in mss P and Q have
been recorded in the critical apparatus to the edition. P's and Q's
variants always stand in first place, set off from those of the paper
manuscripts, even when they are shared by one or more of the paper
manuscripts.
Mss P and Q do not graphically differentiate the akṣaras va and ba.
Any variants that have been recorded because of other errors and that
additionally contain, or rather require, the reading va where the bi-
functional ba stands in the manuscript have been recorded in the
apparatus as containing va, and not an erroneous ba.
The fact that a reading is the result of a scribal correction or has been
written in the margins or between the lines is generally not
mentioned unless the correction or text placement bears on the
establishment of the critical text. Corrections and marginal/interlineal
text that required editorial attention and decisions are discussed in the
edition's apparatus and/or in the notes to the translation.
The extensive breakage of and worm damage to the palm leaf in
sections of ms P has resulted in considerable loss of P's text. P's loss
of individual words and compounds is indicated in the critical
apparatus by way of the sign Ø. To avoid overloading the critical
apparatus, the lacunae in ms P are reported only when a variant from
Q or one or more of the better paper manuscripts, viz. B, D, J and L,²
2 Since all of the paper manuscripts other than mss B, D, J and L derive, directly or
indirectly, from either J or L they do not present singular correct readings, that is,
correct readings which their lineage exemplar, i.e., J or L, does not also attest, and
thus are not taken into consideration here. While it is a fact that these laterPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
103
is reported. In these cases, "P: Ø" appears in the initial variant
position, followed by the variant(s) from the other manuscript(s).
The variant readings in the group of manuscripts deriving from mss J
and L which do not appear in J or L result almost invariably from
scribal error and therefore do not represent variants of any substance.
On account of this, it has not been deemed necessary to mention P's
lacunae when variants appear only in the text of manuscripts that
derive from J and L; the reader who wishes to know P's reading or
lack of reading at such points is referred to my diplomatic edition of
ms P. Thus according to the above scheme, if, for example, thirteen
of the fourteen paper manuscripts correctly read tadā but ms G, one
of the less important manuscripts,³ reads tada, the fact that P has a
lacuna at this point will not be recorded alongside G's variant in the
apparatus. If, however, the majority of the paper manuscripts attest
the correct reading but ms J, for example, in addition to ms G,
contains a variant, P's lacuna will be noted.
Ms Q has lost akṣaras and words from its first two folios due to
broken margins. The akṣaras still visible before or after the break are
reported in the apparatus, followed or preceded by "///". In instances
where entire words or compounds have been lost due to the breakage,
this loss is indicated, as in the case of P, with the sign Ø. Since Q has
experienced far less damage than P, all of Q's lost words and
compounds are individually reported, with the exception of those for
Q's missing folio 10 section. In order not to overload the apparatus,
Q's lacunae are reported for folio 10 only when one or more of the
other main manuscripts, i.e., P, B, D, J and L, attests a variant. The
manuscripts on occasion re-present correctly, for example, a Nepalese-script akṣara
which has been confused with a similarly formed Devanāgarī akṣara (e.g., an
incorrect ha in Devanāgarī ms L may be re-presented in its correct form as a dbha in
Nepalese ms K), there are no cases in the first chapter where the correct reading
occurs only in one of the manuscripts other than B, D, J or L. There is also no cross-
contamination between the paper manuscripts.
³ This judgement “less important” is drawn from the fact that G stems from J. All the
manuscripts that are based on the extant exemplars J and L are deemed, for the
present discussion, to be of lesser importance. They are not taken into consideration
in the second half of the critical edition.104
CRITICAL EDITION
number of lacunae reported in the apparatus for this section of Q will
alert the reader to the fact that the folio is missing in its entirety.
Numerous words and compounds in ms P's folios present still visible
but damaged or faded akṣaras. In comparison, only a few visible but
damaged akṣaras are found in ms Q.4 When the damage affects an
entire word or compound, it is indicated by the sign . Thus "P: 0"
or “Q: ☺” will stand in first position after the appropriate footnote
marker in the apparatus. Given the large amount of damage in P, its
damage is noted only when one or more of the better manuscripts (Q.
B, D, J and L) attests a variant. The diplomatic edition for ms P may
be consulted for information about damage in other instances.
Ms P's damage is, however, occasionally reported in some detail if
Q, B, D, J and/or L attest a variant and P's corresponding text is only
partially damaged, i.e., some of the surrounding aksaras in the
relevant word or compound are still readable. Specifically, P's
reading is reported only if 1) Q cannot report on part or all of the
word or compound in question due to a lacuna or damage of its own,³
or 2) P's damage or unclear and thus uncertain reading occurs at
exactly the point in the word/compound where the variant akṣaras (or
surplus or lack of akṣaras) occur in Q, B, D, J and/or L's
corresponding word/compound. In these cases, ms P's reading from
the diplomatic edition is introduced, but often in a slightly
abbreviated and thus more reader-friendly form. To illustrate, if the
apparatus presents ms Q as reading bhā/// (i.e., the leaf has broken
off after bhā) where the critical text has bhāvāḥ, and P is unable to
fully support the critical text because its akṣara part v is uncertain
and its final visarga is missing due to damage to the folio, then P's
reading is reported as it stands in the diplomatic edition, though
without spacing between the individual akṣaras, that is, as
"bhā(v)ā+", the round brackets indicating uncertainty and the small
cross signifying that part of an aksara is missing. In a similar
6
4
The damaged and unclear akṣaras are underlined in Yonezawa's hand-copy.
5 P's damage is not reported for all of the missing readings of Q's lost folio 10.
6 For the signs used in the critical edition, see Critical Edition: Editorial Signs and
Main Abbreviations. For those used in ms P's diplomatic edition, see Diplomatic
Edition Ms P: Editorial Signs.105
manner, if ms D reads kīm where the critical edition has kim, and ms
P's corresponding word is difficult to decipher but thought to read
kin, then P’s reading will appear in the apparatus of the critical
edition as it is written in the diplomatic edition, that is, as "(kin)".
Likewise, if the critical edition reads puruṣavyatiriktāḥ but ms L
attests the variant puruṣatiriktāḥ, and ms P's vy is unclear, with
damage to the area around the vy so that its vowel cannot be
determined, then P's damaged reading will be included. Ms P's
compound will appear as [3](vy).[1](r).(k)t+h, the unreadable vowel
indicated by way of the single dot. Instead of employing the
diplomatic edition's large crosses ("+") or double dots ("..”) to
indicate, respectively, individual missing or damaged, i.e.,
indecipherable, akṣaras, reference is made only to the number of
missing and/or damaged akṣaras-in this case three at the beginning
and one in the middle-which are placed in square brackets. The
information given for P thus informs the apparatus reader that
although it looks as though ms P may have had the correct reading as
regards the variant in L, that is, what remains of P's akṣara in
question suggests it might indeed be a vya, some uncertainty remains.
In other cases, such as ms L's reading pratyayetya for the critical
text's pratyayebhya, P's reading pratya [2] informs the reader that P
can neither testify for or against the accepted reading. Where damage
is so severe that only one or two akṣaras in a longer word or
compound are visible, or visible but uncertain, I revert to using the
symbol for damage, i.e., Ø.
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
The manuscripts tend not to end verses with single or double dandas
and rather apply the appropriate sandhi for final consonants and
visargas before the following iti, or coalesce final vowels with its
initial i. This iti is then usually followed by single or double dandas.
For the sake of clarity, all verses in the edition are closed with
dandas, which are then followed by iti.
Editorial Policy: Mss A to N
As stated earlier, only the first half of the critical edition contains
variants for mss A to N. Since the paper manuscripts' level of the106
CRITICAL EDITION
stemma could be established on the basis of their variants for this
section, ten manuscripts were dropped after the editing of the first
half of the chapter and only mss B, D, J and L were consulted for its
second half.
Corrections, such as in cases of metathesis where the numbers "2"
and "1" have been written over the switched akṣaras, are usually not
mentioned; a couple of cases have been included because they
contribute to explaining variants in manuscripts copied from the
manuscript with the correction. Marginal or interlineal material
marked for insertion (akṣaras, words, sentences) is generally only
mentioned if it is relevant to the establishment of the critical text.
Neither the Devanagarī manuscripts nor the Nepalese-script
manuscripts distinguish between ba and va, Devanāgarī ba being
written like Devanagarī va in the Devanagarī manuscripts and
Nepalese-script va like Nepalese ba in the Nepalese manuscripts, i.e.,
without the Nepalese-script va's expected lower indent. I have not
noted instances of non-discrimination of va in the apparatus and
instead read ba where ba is expected and va where va is expected.
Similar, but not usually as all-encompassing decisions had to be
made in the cases of ca written within a conjunct or together with a
preceding s due to external sandhi. Some of the scribes (for example,
those of mss B, C, J, L, M, N) took care to define the edges of the ca
in such cases and it was possible to note the exceptions, though when
the scribe started to write less clearly due possibly to tiredness or
haste it became impossible to distinguish his cas from vas and
seemed futile to try to do so. In other manuscripts (for example, A,
D, E, F, G, H, I, K), the cas contained within conjuncts or written
together with a preceding ý owing to external sandhi appear the
majority of the time as vas, and I decided to spare the apparatus the
clutter of noting all of these instances.
It was also often difficult to distinguish medial subscript u from ū in
the Nepalese-script manuscripts, either because specific scribes did
not seem to distinguish between the two vowel-markers or because
7 The paleographical manuals on Nepalese script often present va with a lower
indent; for a list of the manuals, see Pant 2000: 91f. and n. 53.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
107
they wrote the two vowel-markers in nearly the same way. As in the
above cases involving ca, I noted variants only when the difference
between the two vowel-markers was pronounced.
Most of the Devanagarī manuscripts attest Nepalese-script features.
Variants exhibiting them have for the most part not been noted in the
apparatus. It is possible that the transmission line for ms D includes
at least one Devanāgarī stage given, for example, the occasional
appearance of the Devanāgarī diagonal medial e marker; it may, on
the other hand, be possible that this marker, also sometimes attested
in the older Nepalese script, has been transmitted to ms D through
Nepalese manuscripts. Ms D does, however, on occasion exhibit the
Devanagarī r.
A final point regarding scribal habit: Each of the scribes of the
fourteen paper manuscripts has his own personal style, and I tried to
accommodate that style when I recorded variants. Some scribes
write, for example, py such that it appears as pp, and ty as tp, etc. If a
scribe was consistent the majority of the time in writing such
conjuncts, I did not assume, even though he quite likely did not
understand the meaning of the text he was copying, that he was a fool
who did not see that he was copying py as pp or ty as tp over and over
again. One might compare these habits to one's own handwriting, in
which, for example, one might usually write the letter f as a simple
straight line with a loop on the bottom, but once in awhile, sometimes
even within the same sentence, one might write it "properly," with a
loop on both the top and bottom of the letter. I have tried, then, to be
fair to the scribes and endeavoured to accustom myself to their
8
Both ms B and ms L contain numerous akṣaras written in Nepalese-script style.
When, for example, Nepalese ra (correct reading) appears in ms B and is not written
like B's regular Devanāgarī na but is unequivocally the graphic equivalent of a
Nepalese-script ra, I accept the letter as ra and do not record it as a variant (i.e., as
na). Similarly, in the case of ms L, when me represents the correct reading but the e
is written Nepalese style as a wavy line over the m, I accept the reading as correct.
Although this procedure deprives the individual examining the apparatus of full
access to the actual graphical representation of certain akṣaras, I excluded them from
the apparatus owing to the fact that the stemma could be worked out on the basis of
other more substantial variants and since the recording of the akṣaras in Nepalese-
script would not add to establishing the text of the chapter.108
CRITICAL EDITION
individual styles so as not to be so critical of their penmanship that
correct but idiosyncratically written akṣaras and words were
relegated to the apparatus.
In particular, a number of features concerning the style of the scribe
of ms D had to be taken into consideration, some of which are
mentioned in the following. anusvāra in D is sometimes written as a
small circle above the line, sometimes as a dot above the line, and
sometimes as an irregular dot that could be taken for a superscript r.
The hook of superscript r often tends to bend down close to the line
and is easily confused with both the circle anusvāra and with the
curved stroke of medial i. In most cases I accepted this superscript r,
if superscript r was the correct reading, as such, even if the r was
tending dangerously toward looking like a circle anusvāra; but when
the form of the r had devolved so much that it could only be seen as a
circle anusvāra or the curved stroke for medial i, I rejected the r
possibility and added an anusvāra or i variant to the apparatus. That
many of these decisions were of a subjective nature goes without
saying. Ms D's scribe further often writes medial à in such a way that
the ā looks like a ya. It was frequently impossible to distinguish
between nā and nya or mā and mya, but knowing that this was a
regular feature of ms D's scribe's writing, I usually accepted a nya-
looking nā as nā when nā was the correct reading. In addition, the
scribe tends to write, for possibly a quarter of the occurrences in the
first chapter, tva as nva and tya as nya, and on numerous other
occasions, records t for n and vice-versa. While his exemplar may
well have carried such forms, it is questionable whether this tendency
can be attributed solely to the style of the scribe of the exemplar, and
doubtful, if the exemplar did not attest such forms, that ms D's scribe
repeatedly mistook the graphically similar akṣaras for each other. It
may be possible that both orthography and paleography account for
the irregularity here, and that t and n were understood by the scribe
of ms D, or by a scribe earlier on in his ms tradition, as alternative
forms of the same akṣara-element. Thus for the sake of sparing the
9 Brough (1996: 139), criticising Edgerton's acceptance of the forms -itsu(h),
-etsu(h), etc., as Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit forms of the 3rd plural optative and aorist,
writes: "In some forms of the Central Asian scripts, for example, the appearance of n
and t is very similar; and it may well be that at some stage in the development ofPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
109
apparatus overload, I did not record the many instances of ms D
attesting tva as nva and tya as nya the most obvious and frequently
occurring of the above-described feature-but, unsure as to whether
other instances should be assumed to owe their existence to
(possibly) alternative forms of orthography, I decided to record these
latter cases.
The reader of the apparatus should be alerted to the fact that many of
the variants I have recorded for ms D differ from those recorded by
de Jong for ms D (his ms R) in his "Textcritical Notes." These
differences are not usually substantial: de Jong chose to present the
words and compounds from ms D that are of relevance to the
improvement to the text of the PSP in a more transparent form, i.e., in
a form that does not demand prior knowledge of the Nepalese-script
akṣaras and the elements the scribes tend to confuse. To give a
simple but straightforward example, where de La Vallée Poussin's
manuscripts read nipātaḥ¹0 and D attests yāteḥ (for the correct
reading pathaḥ), de Jong, assuming a scribal misreading of y for p,
gives the variant as pāteḥ. I have recorded such variants as they
appear in D, without any interpretation.
10
Cf. PsP₁ 7.4; PSPM §7.
10
Nepalese writing there was a genuine coalescence in graphic forms of conjuncts such
as -ts- and -ns-, -tm- and -nm-. If this is so, then it may be that, in the older Nepalese
manuscripts at least, the shapes which from their appearance we transcribe as -ts-, -
tm-, were actually intended by the scribes as -ns-, -nm-. Alternatively, the confusion
may simply have started through straightforward misreading of archaic exemplars.
However this may be, it is certain that some later scribes considered that they had
two alternatives for their free choice. Where the second member of the conjunct is m
(graphically close to s), this alternation has clearly been assisted by the normal
sandhi of t before a following m. In a number of places I have seen phrases like tan
me, with a tail added to the n in a second hand, thus producing tat me. It would seem
that a reader of the manuscript, either for his own reassurance or in teaching a pupil,
has 'restored' the basic grammatical form. From instances of this sort, some scribes
may have even derived the feeling that the perverse writing looked more learned
than the other, and for this reason introduced it elsewhere also."110
CRITICAL EDITION
PSP₁ and the Critical Edition
L
De La Vallée Poussin often entered corrections into the text of his
edition without mentioning that his manuscripts (my L, M and N)
bore other readings, usually because the variants were caused by
scribal error and resulted in nonsensical words. I have noted all of his
silent corrections, both those rectifying scribal errors and those of
substance, in the apparatus to the first half of the chapter so as to
indicate readings that would appear, according to his edition, to be
attested in the manuscripts L, M and N but are in fact not there, and
also because scholars may find it interesting to gain a glimpse of de
La Vallée Poussin, on whose editions of other texts we also rely, at
work. The inclusion of reference to his corrections and conjectures is
additionally intended to give him due credit for his pioneering and
extremely learned work on the text of the PsP. The silent
emendations he makes that have been confirmed by manuscripts he
did not have access to have been registered at the end of the group of
variants as "em. by LVP (silently)." Whenever I found it necessary to
emend the text as found in the manuscripts, and when this
emendation concurred with that proposed by de La Vallée Poussin,
the statement "em. with LVP" appears before the list of variants. If
de La Vallée Poussin's emendation was entered without square
brackets indicating it as such, a bracketed “LVP emends silently"
follows. Once I discontinued working with the ten manuscripts that
derive from mss J and L, a group to which mss M and N belong, I
could no longer know what de La Vallée Poussin had read in M and
N or infer his reasons for emending the text as he did and therefore
changed the emendation wording from "em. with LVP" to "em.
following LVP."Editorial Signs and Main Abbreviations
Ø
+
22
()
[]
B+
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
+--
111
lacuna: text is missing due to breakage, fibre loss,
a hole in the basis or a missing leaf (palm-leaf
manuscripts only)
indicates part of an akṣara that is physically
missing due to breakage, fibre loss or a hole in the
basis (ms P only)
damage: one or more akṣaras constituting a word
or part of a word are visible but unidentifiable due
to damage (palm-leaf manuscripts only)
indicates part of an akṣara that is visible but
unidentifiable due to damage to the akṣara (ms P
only)
indicates an unidentifiable aksara (paper
manuscripts only)
enclose akṣaras or parts of aksaras whose reading
is uncertain due to damage (ms P only)
enclose an arabic numeral indicating a specific
number of missing or damaged akṣaras (ms P
only)
indicates the vowel a where a is expected but
where the reading a-instead of u or ū- cannot be
ascertained beyond all doubt because the palm leaf
has a hole or has broken off below the akṣara (ms
P only)
indicates the vowel a where a is expected but
where the reading a instead of a, i, e, ai or
o cannot be ascertained beyond all doubt because112
HBI
ạ
///
9
:
em.
conj.
n.e.
om.
LVP
ms
Skt
Tib
CRITICAL EDITION
the palm leaf has a hole or has broken off above
the aksara¹¹ (ms P only)
11
indicates the vowel a where à is expected but
where the reading ā instead of ī, o, or au—cannot
be ascertained beyond all doubt because the palm
leaf has a hole or has broken off above the akṣara
(ms P only)
breakage (at the end or beginning of a line)
avagraha
instead of (regarding word form and/or meaning)
editorial ellipsis
emendation
conjecture
no equivalent for
omit(s)
de La Vallée Poussin
manuscript
Sanskrit
Tibetan
11 "Above the akṣara” refers to the area in which the diagonal and curved strokes for
marking the vowels could be written and does not include the area to the left of the
akṣara where the pṛṣṭhamātra stroke is written.Critical EditionPsPL2
5
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
81. yo 'ntadvayāvāsavidhūtavāsaḥ sambuddhadhīsāgaralabdhajanmā|
§1.
5
saddharmatoyasya gabhīrabhāva~ yathānubuddhaṃ kṛpayā jagāda ||
2
3
7
yasya darśanatejāṃsiauṃparavādimatendhanam |
10 11
dahanty adyāpi lokasya' mānasāni tamāṃsi ca ||
13
yasyāsamajñānavacaḥśaraughā nighnanti niḥśeṣabhavārisenām |
14
15
17
12
16
tridhāturājyaśriyam ādadhānā vineyalokasya sadevakasya ||
18
nāgārjunā praṇipatya tasmai
kariṣye |
20
tasmai tatkārikāṇāṃ vivṛtiṃ
19
1 P: Ø up to PsPM §5 (end of third sentence [= PsP1 4.6]); Q: ddhaya ||
(the right and left edges of folio 1 are damaged due to breakage; the
homage may have read: om namo buddhāya ||); A-C, E-M: om namo
buddhāya ||; D: namo buddhāya; N: om namaḥ śrīvajrasatvāya | om
namo ratnatrayāya |. Tib: 'phags pa 'jam dpal gzhon nur gyur pa la
phyag 'tshal lo ||. 2 P: Ø; D: yānta°; F: yānta...tavāsa; K: yotta°; N:
yo ntardvayā°. LVP (PsPL 1, n. 4) remarks: “Mss. yo 'ntardaya” but
L and M read yo ntadvayā° (N as stated). A: gambhira°; C, G, I:
gambhīra°; E, H, M: gambhīra° 4 P: Ø; Q: yathānabu°; A, I: yathā-
nuddha; E, H: yathānuddham
3
5 A, E, I: jagmada; H: jagmadah
11
6 P: Ø; A, E, H, I: daśana°; D: °jatsi 7 A: paravādimete°; F: °mate-
ndharam; I: °matyamdhanam 8 P: Ø; A-C, E, G-J, L, M: dahaty; F:
9 F: eyāpi 10
rahabhy; K: nahaty
A, E, H, I: tavānsi ¹ A, E, F,
H, I, K, L: va 12 P: Ø; Q: yasyādvayajñānaᵒ; Tib: gnyis med ye
shes; *LT: asamajñānam. Q presumably has its reading from the Y
line (see Stemma). 13 F: °bhacāriśenām; G: °bhavāri≈sanām
16 p: Ø; Q:
14 P: Ø; Q: ādadhanā 15 p: Ø; L: vineyayalokasya
sadeva///; N: repeats sadevakasya 17 P, Q: Ø 18 P, Q: Ø
19N:
20
tatkānām
20 ; K: vikrtin116
N2r
CRITICAL EDITION
3 4
uttānasatprakriyavākyanaddhāṃ tarkānilāvyākulitāṃ prasannām ||
5
6
$2. tatra na svato' nāpi parato na dvābhyām ityādi ma
10
8
9
11
śāstram | tasya kāni sambandhābhidheyaprayojanānīti praśna" madhyama-
12
13
kāvatāravihitavidhinādvayajñānālaṅkṛtaṃ mahākaruṇopāyapuraḥsaraṃ
14
16
17
prathamacittotpādaṃ " tathāgatajñānotpattihetum ādiṃ kṛtvā
18
19
20
J2r C2r 121 yāvad ācāryanāgārjunasya viditāviparītaprajñāpāramitānīteḥ
15
1 P: Ø; D: °satprakriyavākanaddhām
E, H, I: prasannā; N: nnasannām
verses one to four
5 I: mvato
6 N: dvā; Tib: n.e. na dvābhyām
7 N: tyādi 8 H: vaksamānām 9 A, E, F, H, I: śāstra 10 P: Ø; Q:
2 A, E, H, I: tarkatila° 3 A,
4P: Ø; A-C, E-N number the
sambandhābhidheyaprayojanaprayojanānīti; A: sam...abhiveyaprayo-
janatatprayojanānīti; B: sam...ābhidheyaprayojanamtatprayojanānīti;
D: sam...āvidheyaprayojanatatprayojanānīti; E, F, H, I, K, L: sam…...ā-
bhidheyaprayojanatatprayojanānīti; PsP1: sambandhābhidheyaprayo-
janāni iti; Tib: 'brel pa dang brjod par bya ba dang | dgos pa’i dgos pa
dag zhes (*sambandhābhidheyaprayojanaprayojanānīti). The fact
that the manuscript group C, G, J, M and N reads sambandhābhidhe-
yaprayojanānīti presumably has its source in an eyeskip committed
by J’s scribe; ms x, from which mss B, J and L stem, must have con-
tained the reading °ābhidheyaprayojanatatprayojanānīti in order for it
to appear in both B and L. Candrakīrti only refers to a prayojana and
not to a prayojanaprayojana in the commentary which follows. See
Translation note. 11 P: Ø; A-C, E, H-N: praśe; F: pra~e; G: pradeśe;
em. by LVP (silently ) 12 H: °krta 13 H: °karunopāyavurahsaram;
Tib: n.e. upāya
14 P: Ø; A, E, E H, K, L: °cittautpādam
Q: tathāgata/// 16P, Q: 10
8 P: Ø; Q: ///d
A-N: ācāryāryanāgārjunasya;
18
17 P, Q: Ø
Tib: n.e. ārya
20 F: °pārapitānīteh
15 P: Ø;
19 P: Ø;
5
PsPL 35
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
3
4
5
karuṇayā parāvabodhārthaṃ śāstrapraṇayanam ity eṣa tāvac chāstrasya
sambandhaḥ ||
6
7 8
10
11
yac chāsti ca kleśaripūnṃ aśeṣān santrāyate " durgatito
14
9
117
bhavāc ca|
13
15
16
tac chāsanāt" trāṇaguṇāc ca śāstram etad dvayaṃ cānya- G2r
mateṣu nāsti ||
19
12
iti ||
17
18
620
53. svayam eva cācāryo vakṣyamāṇasakalaśāstrābhidheyārthaṃ sa - K2r
prayojanam" upadarśayaṃs” tadaviparītasamprakāśakatvena māhātmyam B2r
23
1 C, G: parova°; M: parova...tha 2 P: Ø; C, G, J, N: °prenayenam;
F: ° pranayanam; M Śāstramprenayenam
3 P: Ø; C, G, J, M, N: asa
4 A: tavad 5 A: tastrasya; C, G: chāstra; M: chāstram
6 P: Ø; A,
10
E, H, I, L: ya; C, G, J, M, N: yec; em. by LVP (silently); Tib does not
include the verse.
7 H: chāstī 8 P: Ø; A-N: va; conj. by LVP:
va[h]. 9 P: Ø; A-E, H-L, N: °ripūr; F: °ripur; G: °ripūv; M: °ripu-
pūr; em. by LVP (silently) F: anesānu
11 A, E, H, I: samśāyate;
C, G, M, N: °yata
12 M: durgatitot 13 P: Ø; A-N: tec; em. by LVP
(silently) Em. with LVP (LVP emends silently): chāsanāt; P: Ø;
Q: chāsanā; A, E, F, H, K, L: chāsanām; B, C, D, G, J, M, N: chāsanān;
I: chasanā
16 P: Ø; A, E, F, H, I, K, L: dvaya
14
15 p: Ø; D: etata
17
A: svayem
18 Em. with LVP (LVP emends silently): eva; P: Ø;
Q: evan; A, B, D-F, H-M: evam; C, G, N: evam; Tib: nyid
19 P: Ø;
A, C-H, J-M: vā°; B: vācārye; I: vāmcāryyo; N: cācāyo; em. by LVP
(silently); Tib: n.e. ca 20 P: Ø; Q: °śāstrābhidheyam artham; A:
°śāstrabhi°; B: vikśyaᵒ; C: °śāstrābhirdheyartham; D: °śāstrahidhe-
yam artham; F: vaksa...rtha; G: °Śāstrābhirdheyam artham; M: va-
ksyamāta°; Tib: 'chad par 'gyur ba'i bstan bcos mtha' dag gi brjod
par bya ba'i don 21 P: Ø; Q: sapra///; A-C, E-N: su°; em. by LVPL2r
118
3
H2r udbhāvya tatsvabhāvāvyatirekavartine paramagurave tathāgatāya śāstra-
praṇayananimittakaṃ praṇāmaṃ kartukāma āha - -
4
5
7
A2r
anirodham anutpādam anucchedam aśāśvatam |
anekārtham anānārtham anāgamam anirgamam ||
10
CRITICAL EDITION
6
8
15
bhidheyārthaḥ ||
yaḥ pratītyasamutpādam"
ityādi ||
12
M2r tad atrānirodhādyaṣṭaviśeṣaṇaviśiṣṭaḥ pratītyasamutpādaḥ śāstrā-
13
14
(silently) 22 P, Q: Ø; A, E, H: upadarśayam; I: ūpa°; PsPL: °yan
2³ P: Ø; Q: ///(prakāśakatvena); A, E, F, H, I, K, L: °parītaprakāśaka-
tvena; PsPL: °parītasamprakāśatvena; Tib: ston par mdzad pa nyid
kyi sgo nas
1 P: Ø; A, E, F, H, L: uhāvya; M: utbhāvya; I: ūhāvya 2 P: Ø; D:
tetsva°; F: °vyatinekavarttine; G: °vattine; H: °varttite; M: °varttire
8
3 P: Ø; C, M: parana°; D: parave; I: °guruve 4 p: Ø; D: °pranapa-
nanani°; F: °pranayana°; G: °ka 5 P: Ø; A-N: pramānam; em. by
LVP (silently); Tib: phyag 6 P: Ø; A, E, F, H, I, K, L: anirādham
7 P: Ø; A: anurāchedam; E, F, H, I, K, L: anugachedam A: anekār-
tha
9 P: Ø; A, E, F, H, I, K, L: om. 10 N: anirggasam
11 P: Ø;
A: pratitamanutpādam; B-H, J-N: pratītyamanutpādam; D: pratītye-
samutpādam; I: pratityamanutpādam; em. by LVP (silently)
12 P: Ø;
Q: om.; A, E, F, H, I, K, L: om. 13 P: Ø; Q: tatrānirodhā°; A, E, H,
I: tatrānirodhādyāstaviśeşanaviśista; B: °viśista; C, J, M, N: °viśese-
naviśistha; F: tatrānirodhājyastaviśeşanaviśista; G: °viśesenavisista;
K, L: tatrānirodhā...viśista; em. by LVP (silently); Tib: de la :: tad
14 P: Ø; Q: °samutpāda///; ; K: pratīmanupādah
15 Em.
0
atra°
with LVP (LVP emends silently): śāstrābhidheyārthaḥ; P, Q: Ø; A, B,
D-E H, I, K, L: śāstre 'bhidheyārthah; C, G, M, N: śāstra 'bhidheyar-
5
PsPL4PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
3
sarvaprapañcopaśamaśivalakṣaṇaṃ nirvāṇaṃ śāstrasya prayojana nirdiṣṭam ||
5
taṃ vande vadatāṃ varam ||
7
ityanena praṇāmaḥ ||
8
10
§4. ity eṣa tāvacchchokadvayasya samudāyārthaḥ ||
119
18
jjanam | ucchittir ucchedaḥ
12
13
5 $5. avayavārthas" tu vibhajyate | tatra niruddhir” nirodhaḥ kṣaṇa- E2r12v
14
15
16
bhaṅgo" nirodha ityucyate | utpādanam utpāda ātmabhāvonma- P2r
19
20
21
prabandhavicchittir” ityarthaḥ| J2v C2v
17
thah; J: śāstre(/°tra?) 'bhidheyārthah; Tib: bstan bcos kyi brjod par
bya ba yin
1
P: Ø; Q: ///ñcopaśama°; F: °siva°; G: sasarva°
N: nirvāna 3 P: Ø; A, E, E I: sāstrasya; L: s(/s?)āstrasya
2 P: Ø: C, G, J, M,
4 p: Ø;
F2r
C, G: prayojenan; J: prayoje(/ja?)nan; M: prayojanan; N: prayojana
8 A, E,
5 I: vade 6 A, E, H, I: om. 7 F, K: pramāṇa; I: prāṇāma
H, I: epa
9 P: Ø; A, E, F, H, I, K-M: °choka°; B, C, G, J, N:
°chroka°; D: tovacchroka°; em. by LVP (silently)
10 M: °ārtham
0
11 A, E, H: ayavārthas; C, G, M: avyayavārthas°; I: ayavārtham; N:
aveya° 12 P: Ø; A, E, E H, K, L: vibhaksyate; D: vihaksyate. The
following explanation of the words nirodha to nirgama appears in Tib
only after the discussion of the compound pratītyasamutpāda, i.e., in
§15; see Translation : Appendix IV. 13 P: Ø; A-C, E, G-N: niruddhi;
F: mirurddhi; em. by LVP (silently) 14 P: Ø; A, D-F, H, K, L: kṣa-
nabhangā; C, G, M: kana° 15 I: ni dha
16 N: ityucya
17 P: Ø;
A-C, E-G, I-N: utpādenam; H: utpātenam; em. by LVP (silently)
18 P available as witness; A, E, F, H, I, K, L: ātmabhāvānma°; M:
ātmabhāvojanam; PsPL: ātmabhāvonmajjana[m ity arthah], but ity
arthah appears neither in the mss nor in Tib 19 F: ucchittin
ucheda 21 A, E, H: prabandhva°
20 A:120
K2v
1
2
3
4
5
6
śāśvato nityaḥ sarvakālasthānur ity arthaḥ | ekaś cāsāv
8
10
arthaś cety ekārtho 'bhinnārtho na" pṛthag ityarthaḥ| nānārtho
12
13
N2v bhinnārthaḥ pṛthag ity arthaḥ | āgatirāgamo viprakṛṣṭadeśāva-
14
16
15
17
G2v sthitānāṃ sannikṛṣṭadeśāgamanam | nirgatir nirgamaḥ" sannikṛṣṭa-
19
deśāvasthitānāṃ viprakṛṣṭadeśagamanam ||
CRITICAL EDITION
18
20
21
§6. etir gatyarthaḥ pratiḥ prāptyarthaḥ | upasargavaśena dhātvartha-
23
vipariṇāmāt
24
upasarge dhātvartho
yan
25
26
balādanyatra nīyate |
28
gaṅgāsalilamādhuryaṃ” sāgareṇa yathāmbhasā ||
3
4 Q: ø
5 Q:
7
6 Q: cārthaś : cāsāv arthaś Q: see previous note
9 P: akārto; A, E, H, I: ekārtā
10 F: om.
1 Q: Śā///; E K: śāśvato nityarthah | śāśvato 20: Ø 3 Q: Ø; A-;
H-N: °sarvakālasthānur; G: sarvākālasthānur; PsP1: sarvakāle
sthānur. LVP (PsP1 4, n. 5) suggests sarvakāle sthāsnu as a possible
original reading. Tib: dus thams cad du gnas pa
///rthah
E, H, I: cet
12 A, E, I: īty; N: i
samti°; H: samkrsta°
17 M: nirgamam
8 Q: °deśāvasthinām; A, E, H, I: sinnikr° 19 A:
°gamatām; H: °gamanām; I: vikrsta
(silently) 21 A: prāpprarthah; I: °artha;
O
16
6 A, C, E-N: nirgati; em. by LVP (silently)
18
20
22
11 A: ta
13 N: rthah 14 D: viprakrstadaśā 15 D, F, K:
0
0
8 A,
A-N: prati; em. by LVP
M, N: prātyarthah
22 P:
23 M: °mā; Tib: n.e. artha
°vasena; A: °vaśema; Tib: n.e. vaśena
25
24 Em. with LVP (LVP emends silently ) : elision of hi. P : uparggena
hi; Q: u///; A, D-E H, I, K, L: °gena hi; B, C, G, J: °gena hi; M: ipa-
sargena hi; N: upargena hi. See Translation note. 5 Q: Ø; F: dhā-
tvarthā
27 B: °mādhūryam; ; J: °mādhurya; G:
°mādhūryat; I: °mādhūryya; M: gangāsariramādhuryah; N: °mādhūr-
28 G: yathāmbhameti :: yathāmbhasā || iti; M: yathābha°
26 I: nīyatye
PsPL55
15
tpādārthaḥ ||
iti'
2
3
10
pratyabantaḥ prāptāv apekṣāyāṃ vartate| H2v
samutpūrvaḥ॰ padiḥ’ prādurbhāvārtha iti samutpādaśabdaḥ’ prādurbhāve"
vartate| tataśca" hetupratyayāpekṣo" bhāvānām utpādaḥ pratītyasamu-
13
14
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
Tib: n.e. ca
13
4
yāyekso
16 A: apale
iti; I: gitir
121
5
1
PsP1: n.e. iti; Tib: zhes bshad do
°sabdo; K: °das Tib: n.e. atra
3
4
10
2 P: °śabdātra :: śabdo 'tra; A:
A: ityabanta; B: ityabamtah; C-
E, G, H, J-N: ityabantah; F: ityebakah; I: ityebanta; em. by LVP
5 A, E: epeksāyā; D : ayekāyām; F K, L: epeksāyam; H: eyeksāyā; I:
epekṣāmā 6 F: samūt°
8
7 M: yadih
A: pādur°; M, N: °bhā-
varthah 9 A, E, H, I: samutpādasaḥ; B, C, F, G, J-N: samutpādaśaḥ;
em. by LVP (silently) A: pradurbhāve, superscript r written
above pra°; E: pradurbhāve, possibly long ā stroke extending upward
from top of pra° (resembles 2 superscript r-s on top of each other)
2 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: ºpratyayāvekṣā; D: °pratya-
14 D: °deh
C, G, M: °tha
18 Q: i///; C, G, J, M, N:
19 Q: Ø; A, E, E H, I, K, L: gati; G: tatir; PsPL: om.; Tib:
'gro ba Q: Ø; F: gamana Q: ø
22 Q: itau, followed by ‘x’
marking point of insertion, presumably for bhavāḥ in margin (PsP
Tib: i tya ni ’gro bar rung ba dag go; AKBh: itau sādhava ityāh ... |);
A, E, F, H, I, K, L: isau
23 G: ityā
24 G: prīti; H: prati. De Jong
(1979: 29), citing PsPL 5.7 as attesting the reading prati, emends
26 C,
pratir, but PsPL 5.7 correctly reads pratir. M: vipsārtha
11
12
15
A, E, H, I: bhavām
17 F: bruvateh; K: bruvato
20
21
25
G, I, M: avan; D: aivam 27 F: taddhitātam; K: taddhitāttam
16
17
18
19
.20
21
22
$7. apare" tu bruvate" - itir gatir gamanaṃ vināśaḥ " itau ”
.
23
24
25
26
27
sādhava ityāḥ | pratir vīpsārtha ity evaṃ taddhitāntam itya- 3r
B2v
D2rQ2
L2v
A2v C3r J3r
N3r
122
CRITICAL EDITION
2
3
śabdaṃ' vyutpādya prati prati' ityānāṃ vināśināṃ' utpādaḥ' pratītyasa-
6
10
mutpāda iti varṇanti | teṣāṃ pratītyasamutpādaṃ vo bhikṣavo deśa- PsPL6
11
15
12 13 614
yiṣyāmi' yaḥ pratītyasamutpādaṃ paśyati sa dharmatat
19
16
17
20
evamādau viṣaye " vīpsārthasya sambhavāt samāsasadbhāvāc ca
22
18
21
23
24 25
26
M2v syāj" jyāyasī
vyutpattiḥ | iha tu cakṣuḥ” pratītya rūpāṇi 5
27
28
29
30
cotpadyate” cakṣurvijñānam ityevamādau viṣaye sākṣād aṅgīkṛ-
1 A, E: ityaśabda; H: ityaśabdah; I: ityaśabdā 2 A, E, H, I: vyatpāya;
F: vetpādya; L: vyatpādya; K: vetyādya 3 G: pat
G: patti 4 P: vināsinām;
C, G, J, M, N: vināsinām; 5 A, E: śamutpādah; B-D, F-N:
samutpādah; PsP1: samutpāda 6 A: °pada; G, H: pratitya°; PsP1:
om.; Tib: rten cing ' brel par 'byung ba
7 H, N: tesā
8 A, H:
pratitya°; N: pratisamut° 9 A-C, E-N: bodhi; em. by LVP on the
basis of Tib: khyed la
10D, F: bhiksuvo
11 A, E, H, I, K, L: pra-
tamtya; F: pratamtyapādram; G: °pāda 2 A, B, E, H, L, M:
paśyamti; C, F, G, I-K, N: paśyanti; em. by LVP (silently) A, E,
H, I: om. 14 F, G, I: dharma; H: dharmma 15 B, M: paśyamtity; F:
paśyatit; G: paśyantīty; H: paśyatīt; I: paśyantity
H: eva ādau
12
13
17 A, E, H, I, K: visaya; F: visaya
sārthamsya; F: vīpsyārthasya; H: vip°
19 A, E, H: sambhāvāt
20
Q: samāśa°; A, E, E H, L: samāsasahāvāc; D: °bhāvoc; M: samā-
sasabhāvāc; N : samāsa, then repeats from viditāviparītaprajñā-
pāramitānīteḥ up to and including anekārtham anānārtham anāgam
(sic) anirggamam | ya, after which the text continues with sadbhāvāc;
em. by LVP (silently)
21 C, G, M: sāt 22 A, B, E, F, H, I, K, L:
kāyaśī; C, G, M: jyāpaśī; D, J, N: jyāyaśī; em. by LVP (silently)
23 A, C, E-G, J-N: vyatpattih; H: vyaktantih; I: vyatpatti; em. by LVP
(silently) 24 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: ihaca; D: ihe 25 D, F: tuc
caksah; F: caksu; I: caksu A, C, E, F, H, J-L, N: vātpadyate; D,
M: votº; G, I: cātpadyate; em. by LVP (silently)
28 D: °nem
26 D:
27
29 H: visaya
30 0F: sāksā
16 F: evamārdo;
18 D: vīp-PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
PsPL 7
2
tārthaviśeṣe' cakṣuḥ pratītyeti pratītyaśabda ekacakṣurindriyahetukā
5
6
8
yām॰ apy ekavijñānotpattāv abhīṣṭāyāṃ to vīpsārthatā | Gar
10
12
13
14
15
prāptyarthas tv anaṅgīkṛtārthaviśeṣe 'pi pratītyaśabde" sambhavati
prāpya sambhavaḥ pratītya samutpāda iti | aṅgīkṛtārthaviśeṣe 'pi F2v
sambhavati" cakṣuḥ” pratītya cakṣuḥ" prāpya cakṣur" apekṣyeti
vyākhyānāt | taddhitānte” cetyaśabde” cakṣuḥ” pratītya rūpāṇi
18
19
20
5
23
27
123
3
22
K3r E2v
1 F: ksīkrtārthaviśese; G: agīkrtārtha°; H: añjikr° 2 A, B, E, F, I, K,
L: pratītyetī; H: pratīteti; Tib: migs dang gzugs la brten nas (= caksuh
pratītya rūpam ca ) : caksuh pratītya 3 A, E, I: tyaśarbde; H:
tyeśabde; G: prātītyeśabde; C, M: pratītyeśabde 4 Q: °hetuka///; C,
5Q:0 6
G, J, M, N: °kāmām
Q: ///tpattāv; A: akavijñānotbattāv;
J, C: °vijñānotpajñāv; E, H, I, K, L: aka°; G, M: °vijñānotpājñāv; N:
°vijñānotprajñāv; em. by LVP (silently) 7 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: kutā;
C, G, J, M, N: krto; D: kūto; em. by LVP (silently) 8 A, E, H, I, K,
L: vipsārthata; F: vipsarthatah; C, G, J, M, N: vip°; em. by LVP
(silently)
9 F: anangi°
10 A, E, H, I, L: pri; D: di; F: dhi (?); K:
pri (?)
11 Tib: rten cing 'brel par ' byung bai sgra la :: prati-
tyaśabde 12 A: °bhavatī; G: °bhaveti; N: sambhati
13 H: itih
15 G: yi
14 C, G, M: °krtārthavipa; ; K: agī°; J, N: °krtārthavise
16 D: °veti 17 G: caksu; I: om.
18I: om.
19 C, M: cah; D:
23 P:
caksu; G: vah
20 G: prāpyavac
21 C, G, J, M, N: caksu; L:
caksun; em. by LVP (silently) 22 A: apeksotu; D: apeksyamti; C, G,
J, M, N: peksyeti; em. by LVP: preksyeti, LVP’s Cambridge ms (= ms
L) bears the correct reading; Tib: ltos nas zhes. Tib: mig dang gzugs
la brten nas mig dang gzugs phrad cing mig dang gzugs la ltos nas
zhes : caksuh pratītya caksuh prāpya caksur apeksyeti
vyākhyā syāt; A, F: vyākhyātāta; D : vyākhyānosyāt; E, H, I, K, L:
°nāta; Tib: bshad pati phyir 24 D: taddhitaunte 25 A: catye°; B,
E, ; H, I, K, L: catya°; C, G, M: catyacaksuśabdeh; I: casaśabde; N:
caśabde; em. by LVP (silently) 26 C, G, M: see previous note; I:
27 F: rūpāśi
caksu124
CRITICAL EDITION
2
3
13v cotpadyate' cakṣurvijñānam ity atra pratītyasabdasyāvyayatvābhāvāt
6
8
7
9
10
H3r samāsāsadbhāvāc ca vibhakti satya cakṣuḥ pratītyaṃ"
12
caitad evam" ity avya-
13
vijñānaṃ rūpāṇi ceti pāṭhaḥ syāt | na
15
16
B3r yasyaiva lyabantasya vyutpattir abhyupeyā ||
5
18
§8. yas tu
vīpsārthatvāt " pratyupasargasyaiteḥ prāptyarthatvāt samutpāda -
20 21
22
23
24
25
śabdasya ca sambhavārthatvāt tāṃs tān pratyayān pratītya
19
2Q: caksur-
1 A: potpadyate; C, G, M: ropadyate; E, H, I: șotpadyate; F, K, L:
votpadyate; J, N: copadyate; em. by LVP (silently)
5
4 Q: Ø; D: atre; M: utra
vijñā/// 3Q: Ø
5 Q: ///syāvyayatvābhā-
vāt 6 P: °sadbhāvā(c); A, E, H, L: °hāvāc; D: °sadbhāvās; M: °sat-
7P: (ca); D: tha
bhāvāc
8 A, E, H: tibhaktihśrutau; I: tibhakti°
10 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: om.
9 D: śatyām; A, E, F, H, I, K, L: satyam
11 P: (pratīty).; A, E, F, H, I, K, L: om. 12 A-C: nipātah; D: yāteh
(not pāteh as de Jong [1978 : 29] records; de Jong suggests the
emendation pāṭhaḥ, following Tib ’don pa); E, F, H-N: nipātaḥ; G:
nipāta; LVP (PsPL 7, n. 5) retains the reading nipātah found in his mss
but notes Tib’s pāthah as a “leçon au moins aussi vraisemblable.”
13 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: ta 14 K: evamm; N: evas 15 A, E, H, I: avā-
ya°; C, G, M, N: avyayasyava
atyupiyā; H: abhyupeya
16 P: ityupeyā; D, M, N: atyupeyā; F:
17 E G: vipsyārthatvāt; A-C, E, H-M: vip°;
N: vipsārthatvān; em. by LVP (silently ) 18 A, B, E, F, H, I, K: °ete;
D: pratyeyasargasya° 19A.
19 A, E, F, H, K, L, M: prārthatvāt; I: prārtha-
tvātta 20 D: °sye
21 A, B, D-F, H, I, K-N: va; em. by LVP (silent-
ly) 22 N: °ārthatvār= 23 G, M: tās; H: stāms 24 P: +ān+; C, G,
M: tāvat; A, B, E, F, K, L: tāmn 25 F: pratyanpratītyayān; I: pratye-
yānPsPL 8
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
samutpādaḥ prāpya sambhava ity eke | prati prati vināśinām
9
utpādaḥ pratītyasamutpāda ity anye ||
125
vyācaṣṭe
22
23
24
25
nā” etaṃ prāptyartham | kiṃ
nāpy
10
12
iti paravyākhyānam anūdya dūṣaṇam" abhidhatte | tasya parapakṣānu-
13
14
15
16
vādākauśalam eva tāvat sambhāvyate | kiṃ kāraṇam| yo hi c3v
|
18
19
620
21
nāsau pratiṃ vīpsārthaṃ vyācaṣṭeṃ
N3v P2v
5 prāptyarthaṃ pratītyaśabdaṃ
8
1
26
27
28
.29
tarhi”| pratiṃ” prāptyartham etaṃ
32
30
33
34
35
ca॰ gatyarthaṃ" samuditaṃ ca pratītyaśabda prāptāv eva varṇayati ||
3
1 Q: samutpāda///_2 Q: Ø
Q: Ø; I: sabhava 4 Q: ///ty 5 A, E,
F, H, I, K, L: ake; D: eka
6 N: pati
8
7 C, G, M: om. A, E, H, I,
L; vitāśinām; C, G, J, N: vināsinām; M: vināsi≈ām; em. by LVP (si-
lently) 9 A, E: enya; I: ene 10 A, E, H, L, M: anudya
11 I: ≈ūsa-
nam; N: dus 12 P: a(bh)idha.e; A-C, E-G, J-N: ahidhatte; D: abhi-
dhaste; I, H: ahidhante; em. by LVP (silently) 13 P: [3].ān.°; A, E, F,
H, K, L, N: parakṣānuº; G, M: parapakṣānavā°; I: parakṣānuvādāḥ-
kauśalam; em. by LVP (silently)
14 A: evat
15 A: om.; D: tāvata-
A: sambhāveteh; G: sabhāvyate; E, H, I: sambhavyateh
16
na
22
25
28
17 F: prātyartham 18 Tib: rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba’i sgra ::
pratītyaśabdam
19 M: prati
20 A, C, E, G, H, J, M, N: vip°; ; I:
21 Tib: ma yin : na ...
vipsārtha
vyācaste
C, G, N: nāsy
23 P: +t+; A, E, H, J-L: e || te; B: ate; C, G, I, M, N: a || te; F: e te; em.
24 F: prāptyārtha
by LVP (silently)
I: ki 26 P: (t)a+h+; A, E,
F, H, I, K, L: tahi
27 A: prati
Q: prāp///; A, E, F, H, I, K: prā-
ptyārtham; C, G, M: prāptyarthamm 29 P: (e)t+; Q: Ø; A, E, F, H, I,
K: atimś; B, C, J, M: atim; L, N: atin; PsP1: om.; Tib: 'brel par
30 P: (c)a; Q: Ø; PsP1: om.; Tib: zhing
31 Q: Ø; D, E I: gatyartha;
PsP1: om.; Tib: 'gro ba'i don yin 32 A: pratityaśabda; E, H, I, K, L:
33 D: prāptov
°śabda; F: pratyatīśabda; G: pratitya°
34 A, C, E-I,
K-N: e; D: eta; em. by LVP (silently)
35 K: carnnayati
J3v126
K3v
3
tenedānīṃ prāpya sambhavaḥ’ pratītya samutpāda ityevaṃ vyutpāditena
5
6
pratītyasamutpādaśabdena yadi
yadi niravaśeṣasambhavipadārthaparāmarśo
CRITICAL EDITION
L3r
G3v
8
9
10
A3r 14r vivakṣitaḥ | tadā tāṃ tāṃ hetupratyayasāmagrīṃ" prāpya sambhavaḥ
pratītyasamutpāda iti vīpsāsambandhaḥ kriyate | atha * viśeṣa-
12
13
14
Mar
15
16
17
parāmarśaḥ 5 tadā cakṣuḥ prāpya
.
tadā cakṣuḥ prāpya rūpāṇi ceti na vīpsāyāḥ
anuvādākauśalam ācāryasya ||
19
sambandha iti| evaṃ tāvad
4
20
21
89. etaccāyuktaṃ cakṣuḥ pratītya rūpāṇi cotpadyate cakṣurvijñā-
22
23
nam” ity atrobhayārthābhisambandhāsambhavāt ||
18
O
10P:
1 A, E, H, I: tenedanī 2 H: sambhava; I: sabhavah 3 P: Ø; A, E, H,
I, K, L: ityedam 4 P: Ø; C, M: vyatpādi | tena; G: vyatpādi || tena; J:
vyatpyaditena, vertical line above te; N: vyatpādite | na; 5 A, E, F,
H, I, K, L: °samupādaśabdana; M: pratyasamutpāda 6 A, E, F, H,
I, K, L: ya; D: padi; N: p(?)adi 7 Em. with LVP (LVP emends
silently): °śo; P Q: °so; A-E, G, H, J-N: °so; F: nina...so; I: °vipa-
dārthapārāmarso 8 A-M: vivarjitas; N: vivarjjitas; Tib: brjod par
’dod pa; em. by LVP (silently) 9 P: Ø; C, G, J, M, N: tadās
Ø; A, E, H, I, K, L: tām to; F: tām tī; G: tām tā 11 P: Ø; A, C, E-N:
°grī; em. by LVP (silently) 12 A: tipsā°; C, E-L, N: vip°; M: vivsā-
sam~andhah; em. by LVP (silently) 13 Q: kri///; A: triyate; I: kriye -
teh; J: kriyate Q: Ø; F: artha 15 Em. with LVP (LVP emends
silently): °śah; P: °sas; Q: ///parāmarsas; A, B, C, E-N: °sas; D: °ma-
16 Tib: brten nas (pratītya) :: prāpya A: ta 18 A, E, K,
L: vip°; F: viptyāyā; H, I: vipsāya 19 p: °nu° (the preceding aksara
is damaged); A, E: °kauśam; D: enu°; H, I: °kausam; N: °kośalam
P: Ø; A-C, E, G, H, J-N: etad vāyukta kim ca ayuktam etat; D: eted
vāmuktam kim ca ayuktam et; F: yatad vāyukta kim ca ayuktam
etata; I: etad vāyukta kim caksu ayuktam etat (most of the manu-
scripts place a danda after vāyukta[m]); PsPL: etad vā [a]yuktam, kim
ca, ayuktam etat; Tib: de yang mi rung ste. See Translation note.
14
17
rsams
20
5PSPL 9
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
127
1
2
iti yaduktaṃ dūṣaṇaṃ tadapi nopapadyate | kiṃ kāraṇam | kathamasambhava
iti yuktyanupādānena pratijñāmātratvāt ||
8
3
H3v
6
§10. athāyam abhiprāyaḥ॰ syāt - arūpitvād vijñānasya cakṣuṣā B3v D2v
prāptir nāsti rūpiṇāmeva tatprāptidarśanād" ity ” etad api
9
10
12
13
21
23
F, K: cakṣu 22 P: Ø; A, C, E, F, H-J, L, N: cakṣuvi°; D: ᵒnem
Em: atrobhayārthābhisambandhāsambhavāt. P: .(obh)ayārthābhi-
sambandhā(s)a+bhạ(vād) (the first akṣara is damaged); Q: atrobha-
yathābhisambandhāsambhavād; A, E, I, L: atrohayārthābhisamban-
dhāsatavād; B: atrāhayārthābhisambamdhāsambhavād; C, J, M:
atrāhayārthābhisambhavād; D: atrā| bhayārthābhisambandhāsam-
bhavād; F, K: atrohayārthābhisambamdhāsatavād; G: atrāhayathā-
bhisambhavād; H: atrohayārthābhisambandhvāśatavād; N: as C,
°sambhavād; PsP₁: atrārthadvayāsambhavāt. LVP (PSP₁ 8, n. 7)
records Paris (= M) and Calcutta (= N) as attesting atrāha yārthābhi-
sambhavād but misreads Cambridge (= L) as atrāha yārthābhisam-
bandhad. Tib: 'di la don gnyi ga med pa'i phyir.
1 Em. with LVP (LVP emends silently): ceti/vati/veti not included. P:
>, the lower parts of two akṣaras are visible after iti (the reading iti is
uncertain due to damage) before serious damage to the leaf begins.
The remains of the akṣaras could indicate a c/v and a t, and there is a
vertical line prior to the t suggesting ti; Q: iti ceti; A, E, F, I, K, L: iti
vati; B-D, G, J, M, N: iti veti; H: iti cati; PsP Tib: n.e. ceti/vati/veti.
2 G: kāraṇa
3 P: 0; A-C, E, F, H-L, N: katham anava tetprāpte sam-
bhava; D: katham anameva tetprāpte sambhava; G: katham anava
tetprāpte sabhava; M: katham anava teprāpte sambhava; conj. by
LVP: katham an[enai]va tatprāpte[h] sambhava; Tib: ji ltar med. See
Translation note. 4 Q: yu///; B, J, N: yuktyunu°; C: puktyunu°; D:
yuktyenuº; A, E, H, I: yukatyanu°; F: yuktatyanu°; G: yu≈tyanu°; K:
yukutyanu°; M: yuktyanutpā° Q: ///jñāmātratvāt 6 F: abhipraya
8 A, E, F, H, L: anupitvād; K: anūpitvād
5
9 I: prapti
7 H: syāṭh
10 D: nästhi
11 P: tạt*(pr)ā[1]°; A-C, E-N: tatprāpta°; em. by LVP
(silently) 12 P: t(y) (the preceding aksara is damaged); D: it
13 P:128
E3r C4r
1
2
3
4
5
F3r naṃ' yuktam prāptaphalo 'yaṃ bhikṣurity api prāptyabhyupagamāt ||
7
8
§11. prāpyaśabdasya cāpekṣyaśabdaparyāyatvāt | prāpyārthasyaiva ācā-
ryanāgārjunena pratītyaśabdasya "
10
CRITICAL EDITION
6
(et)a[1]; A, C, E-N: adād; B: atad; em. by LVP (silently)
¹ A, E, H, I: na yu
2 P: Ø; E, H, I, L: prāptyaº
3 A: ya; I: om.
4 Em. by LVP (silently): atrāpi; LVP's emendation ostensibly based
on Tib which attests 'dir (G, N, P) and 'di la (C, D). Tib: n.e. api.
5 A, E, F, H, L: prāptyatyupagamāta; B-D, J, M, N: prāptyatyupaga-
māt; G: prāptyutyupatamāt; K, I: ºmāta; em. by LVP (silently) 6D:
prāptosabdasya 7 I: capekṣaº; A, B, E, F, J-L: capekṣyaᵒ; C, G, M:
capakṣyaᵒ; H: capekṣe°; N: capekṣyaśabdasyacapekṣyaparyāyatvāt;
em. by LVP (silently) 8 Q: prāptyarthasya caiva; D: prärppyartha-
syaiva; A, E, H: prāpyārthasyeva; I: prāpyārthasyava; em. by LVP:
prāptyarthasyaiva. See Translation note. Tib: phrad nas zhes bya ba'i
sgra yang ltos nas zhes bya ba’i sgra’i rnam grangs yin pa'i phyir
dang | rten cing 'brel par zhes bya ba’i sgra ni | ….. zhes slob dpon klu
sgrub kyis kyang phrad nas zhes bya ba’i don nyid du zhal gyis bzhes
pa'i phyir ro ||. LVP (PsP₁ 9, n. 2) reconstructs the Skt of Tib’s phrad
nas zhes bya ba don nyid du as prāpyetyarthasya eva but the
translators have on occasion in this section taken the liberty of add-
ing zhes bya ba for the sake of clarity; cf., e.g., earlier on in this same
sentence where prāpyaśabdasya has been translated as phrad nas zhes
bya ba’i sgra and apekṣyaśabdaᵒ has been translated as ltos nas zhes
bya ba'i sgra; cf. also the following paragraph's pratītyasamutpāda-
sabdayoḥ, which has been translated as rten cing 'brel par zhes bya
ba dang 'byung ba zhes bya ba'i sgra gnyis.
9 B-N: ācāryāryanā-
gārjunainam; A: ācāryāryanāgārjunenam; em. by LVP (silently):
ācāryāryanāgārjunena; Tib: slob dpon klu sgrub kyis kyang.
pratityaᵒ; H: pratīta
10 A:5
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
tat tat prāpya utpannaṃ notpannaṃ tat svabhāvataḥ |
9
10
12
ity abhyupagamād dūṣaṇam api nopapadyata" ityapare ||
13
14
§12. yac cāpi svamataṃ vyavasthāpitam'
16
17
19
kiṃ tarhi”| asmin satīdaṃ bhavaty asyotpādāda idam
"
20
utpadyata itīdampratyayatārthaḥ pratītyasamutpādārthaḥ
21
22
129
18
Q2v
1M: ta
2
± Q: Ø; A, E, E H, I, K, L: ta; M: hat 3 Q: Ø; A, E, E H, I,
K, L: pya; C: pāpya 4 Q: Ø; N: yad yad 5 Q: Ø; A, E, F, H, I, K, L:
utpanna 6 Q: ///tpannan; A-C, E-N: om.; conj. by LVP: [notpan-
nam]. The verse-half (= YS 19ab) is repeated in §13.
7Q: tat tat;
D: tet 8 D: svābhāvat 9 C, M: atyupagapagamād; D: atyupamat;
F: atyupa°; G: utyupagapagasād; I: ebhyupa° 10 H: dūyanam; I:
dūsanamm; M: dus°; conj. by LVP: [tato] dusanam; Tib: des na skyon
11 A, E, F, K, L: nāpapadyata; C, G, J, M: papadyate; H: nāpapayata;
N: padyate; em. by LVP (silently)
12 F: ityepare
13 N: svematam
14 I: vevasthāpitam 15 A, C-N: tarjy; em. by LVP (silently) 16 A,
17
B, E, F, H-L: samtīdam; C, G, M, N: santi; F: samtidam; em. by LVP
(silently) 7D: bhevati 18 P: (a)+(y)+(t) ; Q: asyaivotpādad; A,
E, H, L: asyet°; ; K: asyat°; N: asyotpādad; Tib: 'di skyes pa'i phyir
19 P: [2](m); A-C, E, F-N: im; em. by LVP (silently)
20 A, E, H:
upadyata; I: upayeta 21 A: itidampratyaya°; B, D: °tārtham; C, G, J,
M, N: °tārtham; E, F, H, I, K, L: °tārtha; em. by LVP (silently)
22 E, H, I: °tham
23 D: °śabdaryāh 24C, G, J, M, N: pratyakam
25 A-C, E-N: °viśesānavidhānāt; D: viśesānāmvadhānāt; em. by LVP
(silently) 26 A, E, E H, I, K, L: tadyu°; M: tatmutpādasya
27 Q:
vivaksi///; C, G, J, M, N: vivarjitatvāt; D: vivarj(?)itatvāt; em. by
LVP: vivaksitatvāt. LVP (PsPL 10, n. 1) records, “Mss. vivarjitatvāt,”
but Cambridge (= L) clearly reads vivakṣitatvāt; Tib: brjod par 'dod
J4r I4v
PsPL 10 iti tadapi nopapadyate' pratītyasamutpādaśabdayoḥ” pratyekam” artha- G4r
viśeṣānabhidhānāt tadvyutpādasya ca vivakṣitatvāt ||
25
26
27
N4r130
CRITICAL EDITION
1
2
§13. athāpi rūḍhiśabda pratītyasamutpādaśabdam abhyupetyāraṇye-
5
tilakādid evam ucyate tadapi nopapannam| avayavārthānu-
L3v gamasyaiva pratītyasamutpādaśabdasyācāryeṇa
8
4
3
pa'i phyir. De Jong (1978: 29) argues: "In spite of T read as Mss. and
R. Candrakīrti accuses Bhāvaviveka of not having analysed the
expression pratītyasamutpāda." Ms D's (= de Jong's ms R's) j of vi-
varjitatvāt is, however, somewhat strangely formed, unlike the more
typical j found, e.g., in jāti, jarā, etc., of D's fol. 3r, line 2. Given that
j and kṣa are often confused in Nepalese-script mss, D's j of vivarji-
tatvāt could be the mangled remains of a kṣa, to which a superscribed
r has been added. Although ms J recorded vivarjitatvāt, ms L, also
descended from ms λ, read and copied vivakṣitatvāt, as did ms B
which descends, together with ms λ, from ms ê. I think it can further
be assumed that Candrakīrti asserts that an analysis was intended by
Bhāviveka because Bhāviveka commenced his discussion of the
compound pratītyasamutpāda with the presentation of two different
analyses of the compound.
2
Q: Ø Q: ///dhi°; D: ruti°; I: rūnḍhiᵒ
samupādāśabdam
5
3 H: °śabdayom; I: pratī-
4 A, E, L: atyupetyāraṇyetitisakādivad; B:
abhyupetyāraṇyetitilakādivad; C, M: apyupetyārathetitilakādivad; D:
atyupetyāraṇyetitilekādivad; F, K: atyūpetyāraṇyetititsakādivad; G:
apyayetyārathetitilakādivad; H: atyuyetyāraṇyetitisakādivad; I: atyu-
tyāraṇyotitisakādid; J, N: apyupetyāraṇyetitilakādivad; em. by LVP
(silently) Q: tta in the upper margin and an insertion-point 'x'
after the akṣara va of ᵒāraṇyetilakādivad appear to indicate the read-
ing tad evam; B: eyam; Tib: de skad du (n.e. tad) A: nāpapannem;
C, D, E, G-J, L, M: nopapannem; F, K: nopapattem; N: nopannem;
em. by LVP (silently) 7 A, B, E, H-J, L, N: °gatasyaiva; C, G, M:
avayavārthānagatasyaiva; D: evayavārthānugatasyaiva; F: avaya-
vārthāmūgatasyaiva; K: avayavārthamūgatasyaiva; PsP₁: avayavār-
thānugatasyaiva P: pratītyasamutpādasyā°; A, E, H, K, L: pratī-
tyasamutpādasyācāryaṇa; B-D, F, G, J, N: pratītyasamutpādasyā°; I:
pratītyasamutpādasyācārjyena; M: pratītyasamutpādasyāvāryeṇa;
6
85
2
3
tat tat prāpya yad utpannaṃ notpannaṃ tat svabhāvataḥ|
4
ity abhyupagamāt ||
5
§14. atha
artha
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
asmin satīdaṃ bhavati' hrasve' dīrghaṃ" yathā sati|
13
16
iti" vyākhyāyamānena" nanu tad evābhyupagataṃ" bhavati" hrasvaṃ॰ K4r A3v
18
19
20
21
622
pratītya
hrasvaṃ prāpya hrasvam apekṣya dīrghaṃ bhavatīti |
17
23
tataśca
131
24
25
devadūṣyate tad evābhyupagamyata iti na yujyate ity M3v H4r
7
PsP1: pratītyasamutpādasya ācāryena; Tib: rten cing 'brel par 'byung
ba’i sgra ni slob dpon
1 A, I: tan
2 I: d 3 A: om. 4 A, D, E, F, H, L: etyupaº; B, M:
atyupa°; K: ebhyupa°; N: abhyupamāt; em. by LVP (silently)
5 Q:
n.e. atha; A, E, F, H, I, K, L: atho; Tib: ci ste 6 P: asmina; A, E, F,
H, I, K, L: smim A: satidam; E: satīmdam; F: satīndam; H:
sayīmdan; I: samtīdan 8 A, E: ntavati; D, F: bhavatī; H, I: tavati
9 D: sva
10 G, I: dirga
11 A: i; G: ti 12 P: khyāyamānena, vyā
appears to have been erased
13 P: tu; A-E, G-N: nutu; F: tūtu; em.
by LVP (silently); Tib: ci ste zhes bya bas 'chad par byed pas
thung ngu dang phrad cing thung ngu la brten te | thung ngu la ltos
nas ring por’gyur ro zhes de nyid khas blangs par 'gyur ro
14 F, M:
O
evātyupa°; I: evahbhyu
15 A, E, H, I: bhavatā; F, K: bhavatī; L:
16
6 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: om. 17
bhavati(?)
Q: pra///; A, E, F, H, I, K,
L: om.; N: pratibya
18 Q: Ø
19 Q: Ø; D: prāpye; C, G, M: repeat
hrasvam prāpya; Tib: thung ngu dang phrad cing thung ngu la brten
(reverses hrasvam pratītya hrasvam prāpya) *Q: ///m
21 A, E, F,
I, K: epeksya; H: epyaksya; L: epeksyam
22 A, C, E-N: dirgha; em.
23 Tib: n.e. ca
by LVP (silently)
24 Tib: n.e. eva
5 D, M: evā-
tyu°; F: evotyu°; I: evābhapagameta; N: °gamya
20
25B4r
15r C4v
132
2
alaṃ' prasaṅgena ||
3
6
$15. tadevaṃ hetupratyayāpekṣaṃ bhāvānām utpādaṃ paridīpayatā bhaga-
va
CRITICAL EDITION
9
10
ahetvekahetuviṣamahetusambhūtatvaṃ svaparobhayakṛtatvaṃ ca bhā-
16
padārthānāṃ
20
21
bhavati | evedana
5
7
vā
13
14
vānāṃ" niṣiddhaṃ bhavati| tanniṣedhāc ca sāṃvṛtānāṃ
17
19
8
na ’dir : tad evam
ksam; G: hetupāyaksam
15
18
yathāvasthitaṃ sāṃvṛtaṃ svarūpam udbhāvitaṃ
5
22
sāṃvṛtaḥ” pratītyasamutpādaḥ svabhāvenānutpannatvād āryajñānāpekṣayā¨ PsPL 11
nāsmin” nirodho” vidyate yāvan” nāsmin ” nirgamo vidyata
27
28
29
¹ A, E, F, H, I, K, L: anam 2 I: prasargena 3 Tib: de’i phyir de Itar
4 A, E, H, I, K: °āpeksyam; C, M: hetupāpa-
5 A, H: bho°
6 A: utpodam
7 A, E, F,
5
H, I, K, L: bhagaveta
| rgyu gcig pu nyid
9 A: svaparobhaya-
J: °visamehetu°; Tib: rgyu med pa nyid dang
dang | mi mthun pa'i rgyu las byung ba nyid
krmtatve; B, C, E, G-N: °krtatve; D: krtetvam; F:
svaparābhayakrtatve; em. by LVP (silently) 10 A-N: va; em. by LVP
11 Q: bhāvānā; E: bhāvātā; A, F, H, I, K, L: bhāvānā
(silently)
12
18
21
¹2 A, E, H, I, K, L: bhevati 13 A, E, E H, K, L: °sedhā; I: tantisedha
14 A, C-I, L-N: va; em. by LVP (silently) 15 C, J, M, N: sāvr°; G, I:
17
16 G, H, I: °nā
sāvrtānā
Q: yath///; F: yathāvasvitam Q: Ø
19 A, E, L: uhāvitam; F: uhārvitam; H: umuhāvitam; M: utbhā°
20I: su
1 C, J: eva°; D: evedānām; A, E, I: evedānī; G, M:
evadānī; N: evadānīn 22 I: savrtah; A-C, E-H, J-M: samvrtah; D:
sāmvrteh; N: samvrtah; em. by LVP (silently)
23 A, E, K, L:
ārdyaº; H: ārdyajñānāpyekṣayā; I: ārdyajñātāpekṣayā
24 D: nosmin;
M: nāsmi M: rodho 26 C, F, G, J-M: yāva; N: om.; em. by LVP
(silently) 27 D: nosmin; K, L: nāsmi; N: om. 28 D, K: nirgamā;
N: om.
25
29N: om.
8
G: ahetvekehetu°; H: °visamahetusabhū°;PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
3
ity anirodhādibhir aṣṭabhir viśeṣaṇair viśiṣyate |
nirodhādayo na santi pratītyasamutpādasya tathā
10
12
1
8
.
133
5 6
yathā ca
kaleG4v P3r
9
13
śāstreṇa pratipādayiṣyati"| anantaviśeṣaṇasambhave 'pi pratī-
14
15
16
tyasamutpādasyāṣṭānām evopādānam eṣāṃ prādhānyena” vivādā-
18
5 ṅgabhūtatvāt ||
19
20
§16. yathāvasthitapratītyasamutpādadarśane ca satyāryāṇām abhi-
dhānābhidheyādilakṣaṇasya” prapañcasya sarvathoparamāt prapañcānām
22
23
24
1 P: anni°; A, C-E, G, J-L, N: anirodhādibhin; B: anirodhādibhirn; F:
enirodhādibhin; H: aniradhedibhin; I: anīro°; M: a≈irodhādibhin; em.
6
10
by LVP (silently) 2 A, C, E-L: astabhi; M: astābhi ³ A, E, F, H, I,
K, L: °sanai 4 Q: vvisesyate 5 Tib inserts the word explanation
block that appeared earlier in Skt (85) immediately before this
sentence beginning with yathā ca. A-N: va; em. by LVP (silently);
Tib: n.e. ca 7 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: °dayā
8 A, E, F, J, H, K, L, N:
pratīta°; I: pratita° 9 A-C, E-N: sakale; em. by LVP (silently) of
sakale to sakala, interpreted as the initial element of the compound
sakalaśāstrena Q: śāstre, with a small ‘x’ inserted between stre
and the next aksara pra; a na aksara is, however, not written in the
margin 11 Q: pratipādayis ///; D: pratipratipādayisyati
12 Q: ///na-
sambhave; A-C, E-M: °viśesena°; D: ananteviśesena°; N: °vise-
sona°; em. by LVP (silently) 13 A, E, F, I, K, L: yi; H: ya
°āstānās; ; H: °āstānom; N: °āstonām ' A-N: evā°; em. by LVP
(silently) 16 Tib: di dag kho na :: esām 17 A: prathānona; I: pra-
dhānyana 18 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: vivādāgabhū°; C, G, M: virā-
dāṁgaᵒ; N: virādānam eṣām pradhānyona vicādāṁgabhūtatvāta; em.
by LVP (silently) 19 P : ° pratisamutpāda ; Q: samutpādarśane; A,
E, F, I, K, L: °samutpādarśanena; B, C, G, J, M, N: °samutpādadarśa-
nena; H: yathāpasthi...nena; em. by LVP (silently)
20 A-C, E-N:
om.; PsPL: om.; Tib: n.e. Q: abhidhānābhidheyalakşanasya; A-C,
E-N: om. abhidhāna; PsP1: om. abhidhāna; Tib: brjod bya dang rjod
14 B:
15
21
J4v
F3v134
H4v I5v
E3v upaśamo 'sminniti sa eva pratītyasamutpādaḥ' prapañcopaśama
ityucyate| cittacaittānāṃ ca tasmin apravṛttau jñānajñeyavyavahāra-
3 4
5
6
N4v
7
8
9
nivṛttyā jātijarāmaraṇādiniravaśeṣopadravarahitatvāc chivaḥ |
K4v L4r_ yathābhihitaviśeṣaṇasya pratītyasamutpādasya " deśanākriyayā īpsi-
12
CRITICAL EDITION
10
13
tatamatvāt karmaṇā nirdeśaḥ ||
§17. anirodhamanutpādamanucchedam aśāśvatam|
2
byed dang | mtshan nyid dang mtshon bya la sogs pa. See Translation
note. 22 N: prapañca: Tib: spros pa rnams :: prapañcasya
23 E, H,
I: °paramātā; M: °thopamāt 24 A: prapañconām; B, C, E, F, H, J, L-
N: prapamcovām; G, I: prapañcāvām; K: prapamcocām; em. by LVP
(silently)
2 A, E, F, G, I, K, L: prapañcā°; H: pra-
6
7 A:
1N: pratisamutpādamh
pamcā°
3 Q: °caittān///; A-M: °caityānām; N: °caityānāñ; em. by
LVP (silently) 4 Q: Ø; A: cetī; B, C, E-N: ce; em. by LVP (silently)
5 Q: Ø; E, F, H, I, L: tasmint; K: tasmitt Q: Ø; J: apravrtto
°jñeyevyavahāranivrtte; B, E K: °jñayavyavahāranivrtye; C, G, J:
°jñayavyavahāranivrtyo; D: °jñayavyavahāranivrtyā; E, H: °jñeye-
vyavahāranivrtye; I jñeyevevahāranivrttau; L: ° jñayavyavahāna-
nivrtye; M: °tto; N: °nivrtyo; em. by LVP (silently): °nivrttau; Tib:
shes pa dang shes bya'i tha snyad log pa’i sgo nas
8 A: °rahitotyā;
E, I, K: °rahito | tyā; F: °ādininavaśesopudravarahitotvāc; G: °ādi-
nivaravaśeso°; H: °rahitām | tyā; L: ºrahitohtyā; N: °rahitattvon; Tib
adds na ba after its translation for jarā A: chivavana; C, G, J, M:
chiva; E, E K, L: chivana; H: chivanam; I: chivana ⁰ A, E, F, H, I,
K, L: °viśesanayā; D: yathābhihite° 11 F: om. pratītyasamutpāda-
sya deśanākriyayā īpsitatamatvāt karmaṇā nirdeśaḥ || anirodham
anutpādam anucchedam aśāśvatam | anekārtham anānārtham anāga-
mam anirgamam || yah; N: °samupa 12 A, C-E, G, H, J-N: ipsi°; I:
ipsitasatvāt; em. by LVP (silently)
13 G: nideśah
9
10
55
2
anekārtham anānārtham' anāgamam anirgamam ||
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
5
yaḥ pratītyasamutpādaṃ prapañcopaśamaṃ śivam |
10
PsPL12 iti ||
6
9
deśayāmāsa sambuddhastaṃ vande
3
135
12
yathopavarṇitapratītyasamutpādāvagamāc" ca tathāgatasyaivaikasyā- B4v A4r C5r
viparītārthavāditvaṃ paśyan sarvaparapravādāṃś ca bālapralāpān
13
D3r
M4r
14
4 P: prapa-
1
M: anārtham
2 N: arggamam 3 M, N: °da
ñcopasamam; Q: copaśamam; A : prayavopaśama; E: prayavopa°; F:
prapamcā°; G: prayamco°; H, L: prayaco°; I: prayacopaśama; K:
prapaco°
5 Q: Ø
6 Q: ///sa; A, E, H, I, K, L: deśayāsa; F:
daśayāsa; N: deśayāmā 7 E, F, H, I, K, L: sambuddhams 8 A, E, I:
tum 9 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: samvamddha; em. by LVP (silently):
deśayāmāsa sambuddhas tam vande vadatām varam, obviously on the
basis of Tib’s spros pa nyer zhi zhi bstan pa || rdzogs pa'i sangs rgyas
smra rnams kyi || dam pa de la phag 'tshal lo ||. vadatām varam
appears in the Skt mss only at the end of the following sentence; it is
also attested there in Tib. The Tibetan translators included smra
rnams kyi || dam pa here in the verse because, unlike in Skt, where
vadatām varam follows vande, smra rnams kyi || dam pa appears
before phyag 'tshal lo. Skt vadatām varam merely completes the
quotation; the Tib verse could hardly have been left without the
phrase preceding phyag 'tshal lo.
10 PsPL: om. 11 Q: yathopavar-
nnina°; B: yathopavanīta°; C, G, J, M, N: yathopavanita°; I: °prātī-
tyasamutpādāgamāc 12 D: vate; Tib: n.e. ca 13 A, E, F, H, K, L:
tathāgatasyevai...ditva; D: tathāgatasmaivaikasyāpiparī°; C, G, J, M:
°voditva; I: °ditvā; N: °tva; em by LVP (silently)
14 F: °pon; N:
pralopān136
ivāvetyātīva prasādānugata ācāryo bhūyo bhagavantaṃ viśeṣayati
vadatāṃ varam ||
CRITICAL EDITION
1
ro°
2
iti ||
5 6
7 68
10
G5r J5r §18. atra cauṃ nirodhasya pūrva pratiṣedha utpādanirodhayoḥ paurvā-
paryavyavasthāyāḥ” siddhyabhāvaṃ” dyotayitum | vakṣyati" hi -
13
19
pūrvaṃ” jātir" yadi bhavej” jarāmaraṇam uttaram |
20
18
3
21
22
23
nirjarāmaraṇā jātir bhavej jāyeta cāmṛtaḥ ||
31:
1 A, E, H, I, K, L: imāvityā°; B, J, N: imāvetyā°; C, G, M imāvatyā°;
F: isāvityā°; em by LVP (silently)
2 D: pramā°; F, K: prāsā°
visayeti 4 A, E, F, H, K, L: varatām; C, G, M: varatām; D: vadatom;
I: varatās
5 I: atta
dhasya; I: nirādhasya
11 Q: pau///h; C, G, J, M: paurvāparyavasthāyāh; D: yaurvā-
paryavya°; N: paurvvāparyyavasthāyāh; em. by LVP (silently): pau-
rvāparyāvasthāyāh, apparently overlooking Cambridge's (= ms L's)
paurvāparyavyavasthāyāḥ; Tib: rnam par gzhag pa 12 A, F: siddhā-
bhāva; G: siddhā°; E, H, I, K, L: °va; Tib: n.e. siddhi (snga phyii
rnam par gzhag pa med par bstan pa'i phyir : paurvāparyavyava-
sthāyāh siddhyabhāvam dyotayitum ) 13 F: jyo°; H: dyotata itum; I:
dyetayitum
C, G, M: vati; D: vivaksyati
16 F: tatir; K: tatir
17 D:
18
22 Q:
14 P: ¬; Q: vakşati;
15 A-N: pūrva; em. by LVP (silently)
hevaj; M: ~avej 8 A, E, H, I, K, L: jārā°; D: jarāmeranam
untaram; A, E, F, H, I, K, L: uttamam; C, G, J, M, N: om.; em. by LVP
(silently) D: jotir; A, E, F, H, I, L, M: jati P: bhave
jāyet; D: jāyate; H: jayata; N: jāyeka 23 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: vāmṛta-
vā; B, D, G, J, M, N: vāmrta; em. by LVP
21
20
7
A, E, F, H, I, L: va; Tib: n.e. ca F: nito-
8 F: pūrva 9 I: pratispedha 10 I: utpādati-
19
LO
P:
5PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
3
5
iti| tasmān nāyaṃ' niyamo̭mo॒ yat pūrvam utpādena bhavitavyaṃ paścāna
6
nirodheneti ||
7
§19. idānīm anirodhādiviśiṣṭapratītyasamutpādapratipipādayiṣa-
yotpādapratiṣedhena' nirodhādipratiṣedhasauryaṃ manyamāna ācāryaḥ Q3r
12
13
5 prathamam evotpādapratiṣedham ārabhate | utpādo hi" paraiḥ" pari-
15
137
11
10
16
17
18
kalpyamānaḥ” svato vā॰ parikalpyeta" parata ubhayato" 'hetuto”
¹ A, E, F, H, I, K, L: tāyam ± A: ti; E, H, I: ni 3 D: utpādeva; I:
utpādyana 4 A: bhavitavitavya; E, F, H, I, K, L: °vya 5 A-C, E-L,
N: yaścān
°nati
6 P: virodheneti; F: nironati, I: nirodhyena iti; K, L:
7 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: idānim; M: idānīma 8 A, E: °višiste-
pra...prativipādapisayā || ut°; B: °visistepra...pādamprativipādayisaya
|| ut°; C, G, J, L-N: ° visistepra... prativipādayisayā || ut°; D: °prativi-
pādayisayā || ut°; F: °visistepra...prativivādayisa (space) ut°; H: °vi-
sistepra...prativipādapisayā || utpādapratisedhamna; I: visistepratitya-
samutpādayisayā || utpāda pratisyedhena; K: °viśistepra...prativiva-
dayisa || ut°; em. by LVP (silently) 9P: °(p).atise(dh).°; A-C, E, H-
L: °pratisedhesaukaryam; F: nirodhānipratisedhesaukayam; G, M:
°pratisedhesaukarya; N: as A, °karyyam; em. by LVP (silently)
10 P: [1]nya°; D: yanya° 11 P: º; A, D, E, F, H, I, K, L: evātº; Tib:
12 H: ārabhyate
13 Tib: yang
14 D: paramh
15 A, E,
n.e. eva
16 D: vo
; H, I, K, L: parikalpāmānah; C: parikalp(?)yamānah; G: parikalpa-
mānah; M: parikasyamānah
17 Q: parikalpita; A pari -
kalota; E, F, H, I, K: parikalpota; G: parikalpyata; M: parikalpeta;
PsP1: parikalpyeta; de Jong (1978: 29) emends to parikalpyate
because_PsP1’s following parikalpyeta (PsPL 12.12) reads
parikalpyate in D. The optative, however, is employed by Candrakīrti
in other sentences with a similar structure, see, e.g., PsPL 138.1-2 (cp.
Tib P 52b8) and PsPL 390.13-391.2. Only when the first alternative is
taken up for discussion is the present passive employed; see PsPL
391.2-3 and PsPL 340.15-16. 18 8 A, E, H, I: para; C, D, G, J, N: para-
te; M: rate Q: vobhayato vā (Q incorporates a vā after both
19
16rK5r H5r
138
a vā
CRITICAL EDITION
1
2
3
4
parikalpyeta sarvathā ca nopapadyata iti niścityāha
fid' den² a³ aìquad´ síà farface.
6
7
8
na svato nāpi parato na' dvābhyāṃ nāy ahetutaḥ |
10
11
12
utpannā jātu vidyante bhāvāḥ kvacana" kecana ||
5
[MMK 1.1]
13
14
15
N5r§20. tatra jātv iti kadācid" ity arthaḥ" | kvacanaśabda ādhā-
ravacanaḥ kvacicchabdaparyāyaḥ | kecanaśabda ādheyavacanaḥ” keci-
17
18
16
PSP₁ 13
20
parataḥ and ubhayataḥ); C, G, J, M, N: ubhayo C, E-N: 'rhatuto;
em. by LVP (silently)
1 Q: parikalpyet; A, E, H, I: parikalpāta; D: parikalpyate; M: parika-
lpeta; Tib: rtog; de Jong (1978: 29) accepts D's reading.
2 A, E, H,
I: savathā 3 Q: pi; A, E, F, H, I, K, L: va; Tib: n.e. ca
4 F, K: topa-
padyate; I: °dyateh
6
5 B: niścityetyāha; A, E, F, H, I, K, L: niści-
tyātyāha
10 P:
° A, E, F, H, I, K, L: va 7 A, E, I: vāṣy; F, K: cāpy; H:
8 C, G, M: ahetutar; D: ahetu
9 F, K: vidyate
15 P:
16
17 P: 0; D:
cāsy
bhā(v)ật; Q: bhā/// 11 P: (kv)ạcaną; Q: Ø; A, E, H, I: kvarana; D:
kvacena; M: kacata 12 P: +e[2]; Q: Ø; A: ketvana 13
13 A, E, H, I: i
14 P: Ø; A: kadavid; E, I: kadāvid; C, G, J, N: kādāc; M: kādāv
+(th).(h); A, E, F, H, I, K, L: artha D: kvacena
°vacanā; G: vacana 18 P: Ø; C, G, J, M, N: om.; F: kecata°. P's
lacuna begins with and includes the akṣara ra in ādhāravacanaḥ and
ends with, but does not include, the akṣara yaḥ in either kvaciccha-
bdaparyāyaḥ or kecicchabdaparyāyaḥ. There is space in the lacuna
for only 10 akṣaras, which could mean that P's scribe committed the
same mistake that ms J's scribe did, i.e., he dropped kecanaśabda
ādheyavacanaḥ kecicchabdaparyāyaḥ; alternatively, his eye may have
jumped, probably while he was writing ādhāravacanaḥ, to the vaca-
naḥ belonging to adheyavacanaḥ. LVP places kecanaśabda ādheyava-
canaḥ kecicchabdaparyāyaḥ in square brackets in his edition and sup-
ports his conjecture with reference to Tib and to the fact that kecana
is glossed in the Tib of the ABh (cf. PsP₁ 13.2 and n. 1); he appears to
have overlooked that kecanaśabda and adhecavacanaḥ (sic) are at-
tested in Cambridge (= ms L). L's scribe, likely due to an eyeskip orPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
139
4
5
6
7
cchabdaparyāyaḥ'| tataś caivaṃ sambandhaḥ' - naiva svataṃ' utpannā jātu
10
vidyante bhāvāḥ kvacanaṃ॰ kecana | evaṃ pratijñātrayam" api yojyam|| E4rC5v L4v
B5r
12
13
14
15
§21. nanu ca naiva svata utpannā ity avadhāryamāṇe parata
16
17
18
19
utpannā ityaniṣṭaṃ prāpnoti| na prāpnoti | prasajyapratiṣedhasya F4r
20
21
22
pratiṣetsyamānatvāt | yayā G5v
5 vivakṣitatvāt parato 'py utpādasya
24
copapattyā” svata utpādo na sambhavati | sā
two, then wrote kvacichabdaparyāyaḥ (sic) as the final compound (he
continued on with tataś caivam). 19 P: Ø, see previous note; A, E,
H, I, L: ādhecaº; C, G, J, M, N: om.; F, K: ādhecanacataḥ; conj. by
LVP: ādheyavacanaḥ, see previous note.
2
6
7 P: (jā)[1];
¹ P: 0, the sole visible akṣara yaḥ might belong to the previous kvaci-
cchabdaparyāyaḥ; A, B, E, F, H, I, K, L: kvacichabda°; C, G, J, M, N:
om.; conj. by LVP: kecicchabdaparyāyaḥ; see the previous two notes.
Tib: n.e. ca
3 E, F, I, K, L: ᵒdha 4 Tib: n.e. eva
5 P: Ø; D:
śvata; F: sva A: utpanā; F: ujyamnā; K: utyamnā
A, C, E-L, N: tu; M: nu; em. by LVP (silently) 8 A, E, H, I, K: vi-
dyate 9 A, E, H, I, N: kvacane
10 N: cana
11 P: Ø; A, E, F, H, I,
K, L: °tayam; D: pratijñātuyam
12 D: nenu; F: tanu 13 A, F, H, I,
K, L: neva; E: neca 14 P: avadhāryamāṇa; A-C, E-H, K, L-N: evaº;
I: ᵒdhārjyayamāṇe; J: ºmāne; em. by LVP (silently)
16 D: utpanno
17 Q: Ø 18 Q: Ø
19 P: [5](s)edhasya; Q: ///jyaº;
A, C, E, F, H, J-M: prapajyaº; D, G: pravajyaº; I: praparjyaᵒ; N: pra-
ṣajyaᵒ; em. by LVP (silently) 20 P: viva(ks).[2]; D: vivejitatvāt
15 M: para
21
P: Ø; A, E, F, I, K, L: °sye; C: utpyā(?)dasya; G: utpyādasya; H:
ºpādase 22 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: pratiṣatsyaº; C, G, M: pratimedha-
tsyaº; D: pratiṣaitsyaº; J, N: pratiṣedhatsya°; em. by LVP (silently);
Tib: 'gog par 'gyur 23 P: c(o)[3]; A, E, F, H, I, K, L: cāpapastyā; B:
cãº; C: cāpeº; D: cāpayatyā; G: cāyepatyā; J, N: cāpapatyā; M: cāpe-
tyā; em. by LVP (silently); Tib: n.e. ca · A, E, F, I, K, L: sabhavati;
24
H: cabhavatiA4v J5v
140
16v M4v
CRITICAL EDITION
1
2
3
4
tasmā ghas' bhavana guṇo 'sti kaścij jātasya janma
6
9
P3v ityādināvaseyā ||
5
8
punar evaṃ naiva yuktam ||
10
$22. ācāryabuddhapālitas tvāha -
na" svata utpadyante bhāvās tadutpādavaiyarthyād
13
14
15
16
doṣāc" ca"| na hi svātmanā" vidyamānānāṃ
17
12
18
atiprasaṅga-
padārthānāṃ
19
1
8
I: tasata
2 P: Ø; D: tesya
3 A: bhavaine 4 P: Ø; D: jalpa 5 P:
Ø; A, E, F, H, I, K, L: ava; D: eve
6 H, M: va 7 P: (n).[1]; A-C, E-
L, N: nava, M: na; em. by LVP (silently) A, B, E, F, H-L, N: yu-
jyam; C, G, M: pujyam; D: pūjyam; em. by LVP (silently)
9 P: ityā-
dinā 'vaseyā; Q: ityādinā madhyakāvatārādidvāreṇāvaseyā. madhya-
kāvatārādidvāreṇā is written in Q’'s lower margin and is followed by
the number '3', and an ‘x’ marking the point of insertion is placed
after ityādinā (in line 3); A, E, H, L: ityādinā madhyamakāvatārādi-
dvāreśāvameyā; B, F, K: ityādinā madhyamakāvatārādidvāreṇāva-
meyā; C, J, M, N: ityādinā madhyamavakātārādidvāreṇāvameyā; D:
ityādinā madhyamakāvatārādidvāreṇovaseyā; G, I: ityādinā madhye-
mavakātārādidvāreṇāvameyā; Tib: la sogs pas dbu ma la ’jug pa la
sogs pa’i sgo nas nges par bya’o; em. by LVP (silently): ityādinā ma-
dhyamakāvatārādidvāreṇāvaseyā. See Translation note.
10 I: ācār-
jyaᵒ; K: ācāryā°
11 H: u
12 P: °vaiyathyāt; A, E, H, I, L: °vai-
varyyāt; B: °vaiparyāt; C, J °vaicaryāt; D: tadutpādaparyyāt; F, K, M:
°vaivaryāt; G, N: °vaicaryyāt; em. by LVP (silently) Em. with
LVP: °doṣāc. P: °doṣā, followed by lacuna; Q: a///; A-C, J, M, N:
°doṣān; D-F, H, I, K, L: °doṣāt; G: astiprasangadoṣān
14 Em. with
LVP: ca. P, Q: Ø; A-N: om.; PsP Tib: dang; BP Tib: dang; PP Tib:
dang Q: Ø 'Q: Ø
17 P: Ø; A: svātmane; B-N: °no; em. by
LVP (silently) A, H, I: vidyamonānām 19 P: Ø; Q: om.; A, E,
F, H, I, K, L: om.; D: ºņām
13
15
16
18
PSP₁ 14
55
PSP 15
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
2
3 4
punarutpāde' prayojanamasti| atha sann api yeta nakā -
5 6
7
cin' na jāyeta ||
141
sfall
8
9
§23. atraike dūṣaṇam āhuḥ
10
tad ayuktaṃ hetudṛṣṭāntānabhidhānāt" paroktadoṣāparihārāc
ca | prasaṅgavākyatvāc” ca” prakṛtārthaviparyayeṇa॰ viparīta-
13
12
2P: Ø; D: epi 3P: Ø; C, G, I, J, M: jāya-
1 F: ᵒutpādī; K: ᵒutpādi
te; D: jyayate; N: jāyaya
N: kadocin
4 P: Ø; A, E, H, I, L: ta 5 F, K: kadācit;
LVP (silently)
10
12
6 P: (n)a; A, E, F, H, I, K, L: ta 7 A-N: jāya°; em. by
8 N: atreke 9 P: (ā)+(u)+; A: āngas; D: āhas
Q: uktam ayuktam; PsP Tib, PP Tib: de ni rigs pa ma yin te (= tad
ayuktam) 11 A, E, H, I, L: °dṛṣṭāntātabhidhānāt; B: ºdṛṣṭānānabhi-
dhānāt; C, G, M, N: ºdṛṣṭāntonabhidhānāt; F: °dṛṣṭāntātebhidhānāt;
K: dṛṣṭāntātatidhānāt; em. by LVP (silently) Em. with LVP: ºpa-
rihārāc. P: paroktad(o)ṣāparihārāt (for daṇḍa placement in the mss,
see the following note); Q: ºparihārāt; A, E, H, I, L: parāktadoṣāpari-
hārāt; B: °parihārāt; C, G, J, M, N: parakta...āt; D: paroktadāṣā...āt; F
K: as A, °rāta. LVP notes that his mss read hārāt and emends to
hārāc ca (PSP₁ 15, n. 6; see next note). LVP emends to parokta
silently. 13 Em. with LVP: ca; P, Q: om.; A-N: om.; P and Q: hetu-
dṛṣṭāntānabhidhānāt paroktadoṣāparihārāt prasangavākyatvāc ca
prakṛtārthaviparyayeṇa, etc. (see diplomatic edition for P's unclear
akṣaras). A-N with a double daṇḍa after hetudṛṣṭāntānabhidhānāt; D,
J, the L family and N additionally place a double daṇḍa after paro-
ktadoṣāparihārāt while the rest, excepting G, place a single danda
after the compound. LVP (cf. PSP₁ 14, n. 5) bases his emendation on
Tib. See Translation note and Appendix VII.
14 C: esañgaº; G:
emlamtavākyamtvāc; M: esamgaº;
15 Tib: n.e. ca. See Appendix
VII.
16 Q: ᵒviparyeṇa; A, E, F, H, I, K, L: ᵒviparyaye, A, E, I, K
and L with a blank space after the compound with a line drawn over142
CRITICAL EDITION
3
4
sādhyatarā utpannā bhāvā janmasāphalyāj
6
7
janmanirodhāc ceti kṛtāntavirodhaḥ syāt ||
8
iti ||
2
5
it, indicating that one or two akṣaras are missing (F adds a dot); D:
°viparyayaṇa; M: ᵒviparyena
¹ P: °vyakto; A, E: °taddharmattye; B, J, N: °vyakto; C, G: viparīta-
syadhya...kto; F: viparītasādhātaddhamakko; H: °sādhyatarddharmat-
taye; I: viparita...dharmmakā(?); K: viparītasadhātaddharmakko; L:
°taddharmakto; M: viparītasyadhyatarddhamavyakto. Although LVP
(PSP₁ 15, n. 2) remarks that his mss attest "vyakto, ᵒvyaktā”, M and
N read ᵒvyakto while L reads °taddharmakto. He emends to ᵒvyaktau
(attested by Q and D) noting that Tib mngon pas would expect as
equivalent vyakteḥ. LVP also conjectures viparīt[ārth]asādhyataddha-
rmaᵒ on the basis of Tib's bsgrub par bya ba dang | de’i chos bzlog
pa'i don, a conjecture I am hesitant to accept-even though the PP
translation indicates that artha stood in PP Skt-given that an
assumed loss of the akṣara parts ā and rth is difficult to explain and
because one also finds, e.g., at PsP₁ 38.12-39.1, the compound viparī-
tasādhyasādhanavyaktivākyārthaḥ. One also notes that the author of
*LT does not appear to have read artha between viparīta and sādhya:
prasangetyādi sāphalyād ityantam ekaḥ pakṣaḥ prasangaviparyayeṇa
viparītasya sādhyasya vyakti[r] nispattiḥ (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 121, 131
[fol. 1b6]). The appearance of don in PsP Tib is apparently the result
of the translators having quoted directly from PP Tib.
D: para-
smāham; F: panaspād 3 A-F, H-N: utpanno; G: utpano; em. by LVP
D: hāvā 5 C, J: jatma°; M: janmasāhalyāt; N: °sāphatyāt
6 P:
jañavir(o)dha[1]; Q: Ø; B: °nirādhāc; C: jav(?)manirodhā; D: janma-
virādhā; G, J, M, N: °nirodhā; H: janmavirodhāc; L: jatma°; em. by
LVP (silently) 7P: 0; Q: °nirodha; C, G, J, M, N: °nirodha; D:
°viradhaḥ; H: virodha P: Ø; PSP₁: om. iti; Tib: zhes
4
8PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
143
2
3
4
$24. sarvam etaddūṣaṇam ayujyamānam eva vayaṃ paśyāmaḥ| kathaṃ KSv H5v
5
kṛtvā | tatra yat tāvad uktaṃ hetudṛṣṭāntānabhidhānāita
8
9
10
ayuktam | kiṃ kāraṇam | yasmāt paraḥ" svata utpattim abhyupaga-
12
13
14
15
16
cchan" vidyamānasya punarutpāde prayojanaṃ pṛcchyate" - svata
18
19
20
s iti vidyamānaṃ” hetutvena bravīṣi tad eva" cotpadyata” iti na
5
23
24
25
26
27
28
ca vidyamānasya punarutpattau prayojanaṃ paśyāmo” 'navasthāṃ ca_B5v G6r
29
30
31
32
33
paśyāmaḥ | na ca” tvayotpannasya punarutpāda iṣyate | na cāp
1P: Ø; J: sarvem 2 P: Ø; A, D-F, H, I, K, L: eta
3 G: apujya°
4 P: Ø; PsPL: om. eva; Tib: n.e. eva 5 M: yatāvad 6 D: °drstāntā-
7 A: itida
8 I: uktam
nāhidhānād
9 D: kārana; N: gāranam
10
11
Q: paratah 11 A, D, E, H, L, M: atyu°; F: atyū°; I: atyupa-
gachanah 12 A, C, E-H, J-N: vidyamānesya; Tib: n.e. vidyamānasya
punarutpāde prayojanam; em. by LVP (silently). See Translation note.
13 B, N: °utpāda 14 D: pramājanam; N: om. prayojanam prcchyate |
Q: punaratpattau
svata iti vidyamānam hetutvena bravīsi tad eva cotpadyata iti na ca
vidyamānasya punarutpattau prayojanam paśyāmo 'navasthām ca
paśyāmah | na ca tvayotpannasya punarutpada 15 P: prcchate; A, C,
G, M: prchāte; I: vrchyate
16 F, K: svate
17 A-C, E-N om.; LVP:
om. (PsPL: svata iti hetutvena tad eva cotpadyata iti); Tib: bdag las
zhes bya ba ni yod pa rgyu nyid dang de nyid skye'o zhes smras pa
yin
C, G, J, M: hetvena 19 Q: bra///; A-M: bravīsi; PsPL: om.
20Q: Ø 21 Q: ø
vidyānasya
18
23 D: cā
24 D:
22 F: vacotpadyata
25
26 P: °na+; A, E, F, H, I, K, L:
27 F, H: °ma 28 Q: anavasthānam 29 P: [1].yāmah; A, E, I,
27
°na
30
L: vaśyāmah; G: °ma; H: vaśyāma; Tib adds yang (... zhing thug pa
med par yang mthong ... ) 0 A, E, H, I: va; D: ce
31 M: ite; K:
ipyate 32 Conj. by LVP: 'na[vastha] A: vāpy; D: copy
33
C6rN5v
144
CRITICAL EDITION
2
3
4
5
aniṣṭheti'| tasmān nirupapattika evaṃ tava vādaḥ svābhyupagama-
6
7
viruddhaś ceti ||
9
L5r 17r J6r
D3v§25. kim iyati॰ codite paro nābhyupaiti" yato" hetudṛṣṭāntopādā-
nasāphalyaṃ" syāt | atha svābhyupagamavirodhacodanayāpi paro na
12
13
14
15
¹ A, E, M: enișteti; B, C, J-L, N: eniștheti; D: atiștheti; F: etiṣṭeti; G:
eniṣṭati; H, I: aniṣṭeti; em. by LVP (silently): aniṣṭeti. Cf. aniṣṭhādoṣa
below at PSPM $95; BHSD s.v. aniṣṭhāpada; Tib: thug pa med par
yang mi 'dod do na cāpy aniṣtheti (the translators have added a
translation for the isyate that is understood through anuvṛtti in the
Skt). 2 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: nirupattike; B, C, G, J, M, N: °ke; D:
nirupayattika; em. by LVP (silently) ³ P: eșa; Q: eka; D: e; I: evaḥ;
Tib: n.e. eva 4 P: bhava; A, D: om.; B, C, E-N: tada; em. by LVP:
tvad (compounded with following vādaḥ). P's reading may have
resulted from a misreading of the akṣara ta, but could suggest the
5
reading bhavadvādaḥ (cf. Speijer § 259 Rem.). A: tadaḥ 6 A, E,
H: syā...vinuddhaś; B, D, F, G, M, N: svātyupaº; I: bhyupagamavinu-
ddhaś 7 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: cati 8 Q: iyati, but with two deletion
marks above ya; A-C, E, G-N: iyam iti; D: iryavr(?)iti; F: imim iti;
conj. by LVP: [tanmātreṇa]. LVP (PSP₁ 15, n. 8) states that Cambridge
(L) reads only iti at this point but it too attests iyam iti. Tib: 'di dag
tsam zhig gis. De Jong (1978: 29) reads D as iryacc(?) iti and states,
"Read iyad iti?” 9 A, D, E, F, H, I, K, L: vodite 10 P: nābhyupeti;
D: nātyupati; F: nāttyūpeti; G, N: nātyupaiti; H: nābhyuyaiti; K:
nābhyupeti; M: rātyupaiti
11 C, G, M: yamo
12 A, E, H, I, L:
°phalya; C: hatuº; D: ºdṛṣṭāntoṣādānaº; F, K: °dṛṣṭāntāpā...lya; G:
hatudrstākopādānaº; K: dṛṣṭāntāpādānasāphalya; M: hatudrstāntopa-
13 A: sāt
dānasāphatyam
14 Em. with LVP: °virodha°. P, Q: °vi-
ruddhaº; A, E, H, I: svātyuvyagamadiruddhacodanayāpī; B, G, L, M:
svātyupagamaviruddha°; C, J, N: °viruddha°; D: svātyupagamaviru-
ddhacādenayāpi; F: svātyūvyagamaviruddhacodanayāpi; K: svābhyu-
vyagamaviruddhaº. LVP (PsPÅ 15, n. 9) refers to PSP₁ 11.14 and PSPL
13.5 (these references are corrected on p. 597 to PSP₁ 18.7 and 21.13)PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
2
1
nivartate
tātinirlajja dṛṣṭāntābhyām api naiva
6
PsPL 16 nivarteta | na conmattakena sahāsmākaṃ' vivāda iti sarvathā priyā - E4v
3
9
145
10
numānatām॰ evātmana ācāryaḥ prakaṭa asthā'py anu-
.11
12
13
14
16
17
mānaṃ praveśayan | na ca mādhyamikasya svataḥ svatantram
15
and translates "Même quand on lui démontre qu'il est en
contradiction ... .” Tib: rang gyi khas blangs pa dang 'gal bas brtsad
pas kyang 15 P: om.; Q: 0
1 P: nivarteta; Q: Ø; A, C, E, F, H, K, L, M: nivarttata; G: nivarttata
tadāpi nivarttata; I: nīvarttata; N: nivartteta; em. by LVP (silently);
Tib: mi ldog 2 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: tadāpinirlajvatayā; B, C, G, J, N:
tadāpinirº; M: tadāpinirlajjvatayā; PsP₁: tadāpi nirlajjatayā; Tib: n.e.
api/ati (the prefix ati is sometimes left untranslated). De Jong did not
notice that ms D reads tadātiº and thus did not include the emend-
ation in his "Textcritical Notes." 3 D, N: °tyām; F: ᵒdṛṣṭāntāsām;
M: °tātyām 4 Q: nivartate; A-C, E, G, I, J, L-N: nivarttata; D: niva-
rttatā; F: vivarjata; H: nivarttataḥ; K: vivarttata; em. by LVP (silently)
5 C, G, M: sabhāsmokam; D: mahā°; F: sāhā° 6 A: vipāda; D:
vivoda 7 A, E, H, I: savathā; Tib: de’i phyir, n.e. sarvathā; em. by
LVP: tasmāt
8 F, K: piyāº
⁹ A: prakata(?)dyuti; E, F, H, I, K, L:
prakatadyuti 10 A, C, E-M: °na; N: °na, repeats initial a; em. by
LVP (silently) 11 A, C, E-G, J-N: anumāna; H: anumātaya; I: atum-
āta; em. by LVP (silently) 12 A, E, I: praśayena; B-D, G, J, K, M, N:
praveśayena; F: pravasayena; H: prasayena; L: pravaśayena; em. by
LVP
13 D: ne
14 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: om.; D: va. LVP (PSP₁ 16, n.
2) reports that his mss read ca here, not mentioning that ms L (Camb-
ridge) omits ca. C, G, M: sãº 16 A, E, F, H, I, K: svata; Tib:
n.e. svataḥ: dbu ma pa yin na ni rang gi rgyud kyi rjes su dpag par
bya ba rigs pa yang ma yin te A: svatabhram; D: svatamtum; E,
15
17
I: svatambhram; H: svatamdha(?)m
A5rQ3v
146
M5r
5
F4v §26. tathā coktam āryadevena.
3
anumānaṃ kartuṃ yuktaṃ pakṣāntarābhyupagamābhāvāt ||
CRITICAL EDITION
16
iti ||
8
9
10 11
sadasat sadasac' ceti' yas pakṣo na vidyate |
12
13
14 15
upālambhaś cireṇāpi tasya vaktuṃ na śakyate ||
17
18
vigrahavyāvartanyāṃ coktam"
4
19
20
22
23
24
25
yadi kācana' pratijñā syān" meṃ tata eṣa me bhaved doṣaḥ |
3 A: °ta
1 A, C, E-N: °na; em. by LVP (silently) 2 D, G: kartu
4 A-C, E, H, J, L, N : °ntarābhyupamābhāvāt; D, G, M: °ntarātyupa-
mābhāvāt; ; K: pathāntarātyupamābhāvāt; I: °ntarābhyupasābhāvāt;
em. by LVP (silently ) 5 PsPL: tathoktam; Tib: de skad du yang ...
bshad 6 H: °devana 7 Q: sadasa///; D: sadasatasadasrc 8 Q: Ø;
C, D, G, J: cati; M: ati Q: Ø; A, I: yaśya; H: pasya Q: Ø; A-N:
paksā; em. by LVP (silently)
12 A, E, H, I: upāra-
naś; B, F, K, L: upārambhaś;
9
10
11
Q: Ø; F: nā
C, J, M, N: upārambhaś; G: upārabha;
13
em.
by LVP (silently) D: cireśāpi
14 B: vaktu; G: vakum; M:
15 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: ma
16 PsPL om. iti; Tib: zhes
vakthum
bshad do 17 A, E, H, I, K, L: °vyāpattinām; B, C, J, M: °vyāpatti-
nām; D: °vyāvarttinyām; ; G: °vyāpattinā; N: °vyāpattīnāñ; em. by
LVP (silently) 18 A, D, E, H, I: voktam; J, N: cāktam
19 A-C, E,
; H-N: °nam; D: vyāvana; G: kāmcanam; em. by LVP (silently)
20 G: prattijñā 21 B: syānta; ; K: om.
22 A, E, H, I, L: e; F, K: de
23
A, D, E, F, H, I, K, L: tat; B, C, G, J, M, N: tad; em. by LVP
24 Em. by LVP (silently) to eva, although he notes (PsPL 16, n. 6) that
his mss read eșa and must have been aware that Tib attests de. Cf.
Bhattacharya et al. 1986: 61, n. 4 and Yonezawa 2008: 268.
I, L: bhevad; F, K: bheva; H: bhedad; M: bhavad
25 A, E,
LO
5PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
PSPL 17
1
2
3
4
5
nāsti ca mama pratijñā tasmān naivāsti me doṣaḥ ||
6
yadi kiñcid upalabheyaṃ pravartayeyaṃ nivartayeyaṃ vā |
pratyakṣādibhir arthais tadabhāvān" me 'nupālambhaḥ ||
10
12
19
iti ||
13
5 §27. yadā caivaṃ svatantrānumānānabhidhāyitvaṃ
mādhyamikasya
16
18
20
tadā kuto" nādhyātmikāny āyatanāni svata utpannānī- 17v G6v
14
21
22
23
ti" svatantrā pratijñā yasyāṃ ” sāṅkhyāḥ ” pratyavasthāsyante
.
147
24
15
K6r H6r
.
C6v
1 D: va
2 Em. with LVP: mama. P, Q: me; A-N: me; the mama
attested by Sankrtyāyana’s VV manuscript is needed in order to meet
the requirements of the āryā metre of the verse (Sankrtyāyana 1937:
14; Yonezawa 2008: 268; cf. also Bhattacharya et al. 1986: 61).
pratijñāna
3 I:
4 J: tasmon
6
7
5 A: taivasti; E, F, H, I, K, L: naivasti
Q: kicid H: upalabhyayam 8 C, G, M: om.; H: pravarttayayam
A, C-N: athais; em. by LVP
A: tedavān; E, H, I, L: tedabhāvān; F, K: tedabhāvāt
10
9 C: tivarttayeyam; M: nivarttayam
11
(silently)
12 F, K: ma 13 Tib: n.e. ca 14 A, ; K: svatantramavumānānabhi°;
18 A, E, I,
16
19H:
B: svatamtramanumānānabhiº; C, G, J, L-N: svatantramanumānā°
D: svatantramanumānanibhi°; E, H, I: svatantramavumānātabhi°; em.
by LVP (silently) 15 Q: mādhyami///; B: mādhyātmikasya; D: sā°
Q: Ø 17 Q: Ø; A-C, E-N: krtā; em. by LVP (silently)
L: nādhyārmmikāny°; C, J, K: nādhyārmikāny°; D: mādhyānmik°;
F: nādhyārtmikānyº; G: nādhyātmikādy; H: nādhyārmmikāmny; M:
nādhyātmikāry; N: nādhyarmmikāny°; em. by LVP (silently)
āyananāni
21
K: svarta 1 A: utpannāniti°; C, G, J, M, N: tpannā-
2 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: yasyā; D: yasvā 23
nīti; L: utpannā | nīti
3A,
C, G, M: sākhyāh 24 P: pratyavasthapsyante (the short vertical
stroke for ā used before aksaras with space-consuming lower bodies
has been read by P's scribe as the initial akşara-part p); A, E, H, I, L:
pratyavasphāyante; B: °sthāyamte; C, ; G, J, K, N: °sthāyante; D:
20
22B6r
J6v
148
CRITICAL EDITION
2
ko 'yaṃ pratijñārthaḥ'| kiṃ kāryātmakaḥ svataṃ' uta kāraṇātmaka
5
6
7
8
9
iti | kiṃ cātaḥ | kāryātmakaś cet siddhasādhanam | kāraṇā-
10
13
12
tmakaś ced " viruddhārthatā | kāraṇātmanā vidyamānasyaiva " PsPL18
15
sarvasyotpattimata utpādāt ||
iti ||
18
20
.21
kuto 'smākaṃ“ vidyamānatvād" iti hetuḥ" yasya siddhasādhanaṃ "
.
22
24
NGr viruddhārthatā syāt yasya siddhasādhanasya yasyāśa ca
23
°sthātyante; M: prabhāvasthāyante; em. by LVP (silently): pratyava-
sthāsyante; Tib: phyir zlog par byed par 'gyur ba
1 I: pratijñārtham; M: pratijñarthamh 2 Q: kāryātmanaḥ; F, K:
kāryānmakaḥ; em. by LVP: kāryātmakāt. Tib: ’bras bu’i bdag nyid
las; the PsP translators, however, are citing from PP Tib. Q's reading
is the result of deliberate interference. See Translation note and Ap-
pendix VIII. 3 D: svate; G: tyata. PsP Tib, PP Tib: bdag las zhes
bya ba (svata iti) 4 Q: karaṇātmana; F, K: kāraṇānmaka; em. by
LVP: kāraṇātmakād. Tib: rgyu’i bdag nyid las. See Appendix VIII.
Tib: n.e. iti 6 H, I: cāta; Tib: n.e. ca 7Q: kāryātmanah; D:
°makeś; em. by LVP: kāryātmakāc. Tib: 'bras bu'i bdag nyid las
8 A, D, E, F, H, K, L: ceta; G: cen 9 A: si≈sādhanam; F: siddhasā-
nam; K: °dhāne
10 Q: karanātmanaś; C, G, M: om.; em. by LVP:
kāranātmakāc. Tib: rgyu'i bdag nyid las 11 C, G, M: om.; H: cad
12 C, G, M: om.; F: °tāh 13 D: kaparanātmanā 14 A, E, F, I, K, L:
5
15
°syava; H: vidyagānasyava
18
20
D: sarvasyānpatti°; N: sarvasetpa°
16 A: 'smāvam 17 Q: vidya///
Q: ø
19 Q: Ø; Tib: gtan tshigs
kyang D: yasmā
21 Em. with LVP: siddhasādhanam. P, Q: om.;
A-N: om.; Tib: grub pa la sgrub pa nyid 22 D: varuddhārthatā; H:
°ta; J, N: virurddhārthata (the small stroke attached to the r of
°rddhā° in J_may be a cancellation mark); M: viraddharthata
23 Em. with LVP: vā. P, Q: om.; A-N: om.; Tib: dam
24 D: sidhāsā-
5PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
3
4
viruddhārthatāyāḥ' parihārārthaṃ yat kariṣyāmaḥ | tasmāt parokta- P4r
7
L5v
5
doṣāprasaṅgād eva tatparihāra ācāryabuddhapāli
10
149
6
17
9
§28. athāpi syāt - mādhyamikānāṃ pakṣahetudṛṣṭāntānām asi-
-
18
8
varṇanīyaḥ ||
11
ddheḥ” svatantrānumānānabhidhāyitvāt" svata utpattipratiṣedhapratijñārtha-
.14
15
16
5 sādhanaṃ mā bhū ubhayasiddhena vānumānena parapratijñānirākara-
dhanasya; A, E, F, I, K, L: siddhisādhanasya; H: siddhisādhasya
1 H: °yā
2P: °ā(rtha.); D, F: °ārtha 3 A, C, E, G-J, M, N: yanna;
B, F, K, L: yanta; em. by LVP (silently) 4 P: kavisyāmas; F: krnisyā-
mas 5 P: paroktadosapra°; A, E, H: parokadāsapra°; B, C, G, J, M,
N: paroktadoşapra°; D: parākta°; I: parokadāsaprasagād; L: parok-
tadāsa°, but wavy line over dā indicates Nepalese do; conj. by LVP:
7C, G,
paroktados[ā]pra°; Tib: thal bar mi’gyur ba 6 I: ācābu°
9
12
J, M, N: om.; conj. by LVP: [na]. Tib: brjod par bya ba ma yin no.
LVP has overlooked that L (Cambridge) attests na.
8 A: varsya-
nā(?)yah; E, H, I: varsyanīyah D: smān 10 A, E, H, I: sā°; F:
madhyamikāno; K: °kāno(?) 11 A: paksehenudrstāntānās; B: °dr-
stāntānāsu; C, G, M: paksahetu; D: °drstāntānos; E, I: paksehetudrsta-
ntātās; F: °drstāntānyas; H: paksehetudrstantatās; J, L, N: °nās; K:
paksahatudrstāntānās; em. by LVP (silently) 2 A, F: asiddhe; B:
siddheh; C, G, M: om. asiddheh svatantrānumānānabhidhāyitvāt svata
utpattipratisedhapratijñārthasādhanam mā bhūd ubhayasiddhena vā-
numānena parapratijñānirākaraṇam, parapratijñāyās tu
13 D: °mā-
nānābhi° 14 Q: °pratisedhaprati / //; A: °pratisedhamprati; F: upa-
tti°; em. by LVP: °pratijñātārthasādhanam. LVP (PsP1 18, n. 6) notes
“Le Tib. lit pratijñā, non pas pratijñātārtha,” but fails to add that his
three manuscripts also attest pratijñārtha. De Jong (1978: 30) has
already noted that ms D's pratijñārtha is confirmed by Tib's dam
bca' ba'i don.
150:Ø
Q:
Q: ///d; D: bhu D: 'bhaya°; H:
'Q: cā°; A, B, E, E H, J-L: cā°; I: vātu°
16
17
18
abhaya°18r A5v
H6V
E5r K6v
150
CRITICAL EDITION
2
3
4
5
ṇam'' parapratijñāyās tu svata evānumānavirodhacodanā svata
8
6
9
evaṃ pakṣahetudṛṣṭāntāpakṣālarahitaiḥ pakṣādibhir bhavitavyam |
7
10
13
tataśca tadanabhidhānāt" taddoṣāparihārāc” ca sa eva doṣa iti ||
14
15
16
17
18
ucyate - naitad evam | kiṃ kāraṇam | yasmād yo " hi yam
20
22
619
21
23
arthaṃ pratijānī te svaniścaya anyeṣāṃ niścayotpāda-
.
5
1 D: °nirokaranam; ; K: °nikarākaranam
2 N: parampra° 3 A, E,
H, I: sva 4 Q: °codanāyām; A, I: yavānumānavirodhacodanayā; B:
°virocodanayā; C, M: evānumānunirodhavodanayā; D: °codanamā;
G: evātamānanirodhavodanayā; H : yavānumānavirodhacothadanayā;
J, N: °nirodhacodanayā. *LT: codanāyām; Tib: gzhan gyi dam bca'
ba la rang gi rjes su dpag pas 'gal ba brjod par ni bya dgos pas. See
Translation note and Appendix IX. A: ≈vata; F: svate 6 F, K:
eca; H: yeva 7 A, E, L: °drstāmtapeksārahitaih; B °drstāntāpe-
ksārahitaih; C, M, N: °drstāntāpaksārahitaih; D: °drstāntāyaksāra-
hitaih; F: paroksahetudrstāntāpeksārahitaih; G: °drstāntāpaksānahite;
H: as A, no visarga; I: as B, no visarga; K: parāksahetudrstāntāpeksa-
rahitaih; J: °drstantāpaksārehitaih; em. by LVP: paksahetudrstantado-
sarahitaih; Tib: phyogs dang gtan tshigs dang dpe'i skyon dang bral
pa dag; *LT ms: apaksātma; Yonezawa (2004: 133) accepts the
MacDonald 2000 emendation apaksāla. 8 F, K: pakṣādibhi; H:
yaksādibhir 9 A: bhatitavyam; G: bha°
10 Tib: n.e. ca
11 C, G,
M: tatadanabhi°; D: tedanahidhānāt; I: °dhānān 12 A, E, F, H, I, K,
L: tadoṣāparihātāc; C, G, J, M, N: tadoṣā°; D: tadoṣāparihārā; em. by
LVP (silently)
13
3 D: e 14
C, G, M: naivatad
15 F: enam
6 N:
°na
17 D: yā
18 C, G, M: parm. Yonezawa 2005a: 66 gives Q as
attesting yā – the mark on the upper right corner of ya could be read
as either yā or yam
19 Q: dharmam; A, C, E-N: artha; em. by LVP
(silently) 20Q: pratijā///; D: pratijonite Q: ø 22 Q: ///d; D:
16
21
23
scayavad
C, G: anyasām; H: anesām
PsPL 19
5PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
1
2
necchā' yayopapattyāsāv artho 'dhigataḥ| saivopapattiḥ
10
8
9
13
y upadeṣṭavyā| tasmād eṣa tāvan nyāyo
bhyupagamapratijñātārthasādhanam” upādeyam |
hetudṛṣṭāntāsambhavāt svapratijñāmātrasāratayaiva
TA
sa
15
yat
16
parasmā-
pareṇaiva" svā-
cāyaṃ paraṃ prati Cr7r M5v GTr
kevalaṃ ” svaprati-
17
14
151
4
4
1 D: niscayānpādaº; M: niscayotpadarechayā 2 A, E, I, H: yayāpa-
patyādasāv; B, F, G, J-L, N: yayāpapatyā’sāv; C, M: yapāpapatyā’sav;
em. by LVP (silently) ³ A, E, I, H: ārthā; B, C, F, G, J-N: arthā; em.
by LVP (silently) A: saisopapantiḥ; B: saivopapantiḥ; D: saivāpa-
pattiḥ; E, H, I: saisopapattiḥ; G: saivopapasti; L: saisopapattiḥ 5 A-
M: parasmād; N: pasmād; em. by LVP; Tib: gzhan la 6 A-C, E, J-N:
upadestavyā; D: upadeṣṭasyā; F: upadetavyā; G: upadyastavyā; H:
upādestavya; I: upadestatha; em. by LVP (silently)
7 A: e; F: eva;
G: eya; I: e(?)ṣā 8 F: tacan; G: tovan 9 A-C, E-N: nyāye; D: nyo-
yo; em. by LVP (silently) 1⁰ Q: papatty (eyeskip back to
yayopapattyᵒ); C, G, J, M, N: tat 11 Q: antareṇaiva; A-C, E-N:
paraṇaiva; D: paraśaiva; em. by LVP (silently) 12 B, F, G, M: svā-
13
14
tyupagamaº; D: svātyupasama...nap; N: °sādhanum; em. by LVP
(silently): svābhyupagata ³ C, M: upādeyam; C and M then
repeat the earlier section beginning with athāpi syāt, now including
what was dropped the first time: athāpi syāt mādhyamikānām pakṣa-
hetudṛṣṭāntānās asiddheḥ ... parapratijñāyās tu svataḥ; D: uyādeyam;
F: upādeyaḥ; G: om. upādeyam, and adds part of the dropped section:
mā bhad ubhayasiddhena cānumānena parapratijñānirākaraṇam para-
pratijñāyām tu svataḥ; K, N: upādeya Em.: sa. P: na; Q: na(?);
A-N: na; Tib: ma yin. LVP accepts the mss' na. He conjectures: na
cāyam param prati [hetuḥ] |; he bases his conjecture on Tib: 'di ni
gzhan la gtan tshigs kyang ma yin no. *LT: tac. See Translation note.
15 A, E, H, I: °bhavat followed by visarga 16 Q: svapratijñāna-
nga(?)ye(?)prāptatayaiva; the two uncertain akṣaras are written over
an erasure; the akṣara pta is written in the lower margin and marked
to be inserted before ta of tayaiva; G: om. svapratijñāmātrasārata-
yaiva kevalam svapratijñātārthasādhanam; em. by LVP: pratijñānusā-F5r J7r B6v
152
2
3
jñātārthasādhanam upādatta iti nirupapattikapakṣābhyupagamāt svā-
tmānam evāyaṃ kevalaṃ visaṃvādayan na śaknoti' pareṣāṃ niścayam
6
9
10
11
12
svapratijñātā-
atrānumānabādhodbhāvanayā
1
17
prayojanam ||
CRITICAL EDITION
ādhātumiti| idam evās spaṣṭa dūṣaṇaṃ
rthasādhanāsāmarthyam iti
iti" kim
13
14
kim
15
O
18
19
$29. athāpi - avaśyaṃ svato 'numānavirodhadoṣa udbhāvanī-
21
yaḥ ||
16
20
5
PsPL 20
ratayaiva; Tib: khas 'ches pa'i rjes su 'brangs pa. PsPL 19, n. 6 states
that LVP's mss read svāpratijñāmātrasāratayaiva°; all read sva°.
17 A: kevaram; I: visarga follows; N: lam
1 Em. with LVP: svapratijñātārthasādhanam. P: svapratijñānārthamā-
tram; Q: sva///m; A-F, H-N: svapratijñātārthamātram; G: om.; Tib:
rang gi dam bca' ba'i don gi sgrub par byed pa (= svapratijñārtha-
sādhanam) 2 C, G, J, M, N: utpādatta; I: upādanta 3 Q: °paksa°;
4
D: °paksātyupaśamāt; F: °paksātyūpagamāt; G, M: °paksotyupaga-
māt; H: °paksyābhyupagamāt; N: °paksātpupagamat Q: svātmā-
5 E K: evāya; H: ovāyam 6 D: visamvādeyan 7 A: sak-
namam
noti 8
marker)
A: paresā; Tib: gzhan la : paresām (i.e., Tib without a plural
9 A, E, H, I: °yas; F: naścayas; L: na(?)ścayas; K: taśca-
yal(?)
10 B: avāsya
11 I: spastaram; N: syastaratara; PsP1: spasta-
tara, compounded with following dūsanam 12 F: yadūta; I: yeduta
13 A: °sāmarthām; C, G, H, J, M, N: svapratijñātārthasāmarthyam; F:
svapratijñārthasā 14 F, H: itih
15 G: ki
16 P: °(b)ādho-
17 D:
d+(āv)anatayā; Q: °ānumānapācodbhāvanayā; A, E, H, L: °badhohā-
vanayā; ; K: °badhobhāvanayā; G: trānu...yo; I: attā°; M: °bādhot-
bhāvanayo; N: °bādhodbhāvana; em. by LVP (silently)
prayājanam; N: yojanam
18
21 Q:
A: athācya°; E, , H, I, K: athavy
19 F, K: avaśya; H: avasyam; M: avanyam; N: evaśya
20Q: °vi///;
B: °nirodhadoşa; C, G, M, N: anumona°; Tib: n.e. dosa
///nīyah; A, G: °nīya; D: udbhāvamnīyasta; M utbhāvanīyahPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
153
2
3
4
so 'py udbhāvita' evācāryabuddhapālana na svata uDANGV
D4r N6v
5
6
7
bhāvās tadutpādavaiyarthyād iti vacanāt |
12
8
9
atra hi tad ity
14
16
10
13
15
anena svātmanā" vidyamānasya parāmarśaḥ | tathā hy asya
18v
2 D:
K: ubhāvita; M: utbhāvita
4 H:
¹ A, E, H, I, L: uhāvita; F: ūhāvita;
nuvācārya°; H: °nah; M: ᵒnā 3 Q: katham kṛtvā yasmād evam
tenoktam written in the lower margin and marked for insertion
before na; conj. by LVP: [katham iti cet]; Tib: ji ltar zhe na | gang gi
phyir des ni 'di skad du bshad pa yin te . See Translation note.
upatyayante
5 F: bhās
6 A, E, F, I: °vaiyathād; C, J-N:
°vaiyathyād; D: udutpādacaiyathyād; G: tadupādavaiyathyād; H:
tadatpādavaiyathād; em. by LVP (silently)
7K: vacanyat; N:
v(?)vac(?)anāt 8 P: svata; A, B, D-F, H-L: svata; C, G, M, N: sveta;
Tib: de dag; em. by LVP: tad. The explanatory statement
(vivaraṇavākya) of the following sentence is explicating the reason
tadutpādavaiyarthyāt of Buddhapālita's prasanga statement and thus
refers back to the two elements tat and utpādavaiyarthya, not to svata
of the proposition. The appearance of svataḥ in all mss but Q may
have been influenced by the passage in PP in which Bhāviveka
adduces the elements for an independent inference from MMK I.1,
the "general thesis"; he draws the reason "because of [already]
existing" for his inference out of the kārikā's word svataḥ (cf. PP D
48b5-6; P 58a2; Ames 1993: 221). 9 F: ijy; PSP₁: aty, which is cor-
rected to iti (cf. PSP₁ 597) 10 C, I, J, M, N: enena
11 A-C, E-N:
°no; D: svotmano; em. by LVP (silently)
12 Q: vidyamanatvasya,
tva written below the line
13 Em. with LVP (LVP emends silently):
°marśaḥ. P: °marṣas; Q: °marṣaḥ; A-C, E-N: °marṣas; D: °mașams
Q: kim kāraṇam tathā; conj. by LVP: [kasmād iti cet] tathā; Tib:
ci'i phyir zhe na | 'di ltar. Ms Q's kim kāraṇam ta is written in the
lower margin and marked to be inserted between parāmarṣaḥ and thā
of the main text; the ‘x' marking the point of insertion in the main
text was written over an erased akṣara, possibly a sta. The visarga of
parāmarṣaḥ was added post-erasure. See Translation note.
15 C, G,
J, M, N: jya 16 M: atra; em. by LVP: tasya. LVP (PsP₁ 20, n. 3)
14154
CRITICAL EDITION
2
grahaṇakavākyasyaitad' vivaraṇavākyam' na hi svātmanā vidyamānā-
6
7 8
9
Q4r LGr nāṃ punarutpāde prayojanam iti| anena ca vākyena sādhya -
sādhanadharmānugatasya paraprasiddhasya " sādharmyadṛṣṭāntasyopādānam |
10
12
13
14
15
16
C7v H7 tatra svātmanā" vidyamānasyety anena hetuparāmarśaḥ | utpāda-
3
refers to the readings atra, tasya and asya in his mss, but both L and
N read asya.
1A-C, E, E H-L, N: grahanakuvākya ; G: grahenakuvākya°; M:
grahenakuvākya°; conj. by LVP: [sam]grahen [okta]vākyasyaitad. De
Jong (1978: 30 ) notes Stcherbatsky's (1927: 99, n. 2 ) suggestion as
tasya samgrahavākyasya but it is actually tasya grahaņaka-vākyasya.
Tib: mdor bzhag pa'i ngag de'i
2 Em. with LVP: na. P: Ø; Q: kim;
A-N: kim; Tib: yang skyes ba la dgos pa med. LVP refers to PsPL
14.2: na hi svātmanā vidyamānānām padārthānām punarutpade
prayojanam asti. BPed 10.14-15: 'di Itar dngos po bdag gi bdag nyid
du yod pa rnams la yang skye ba dgos pa med do 3 P: Ø; A-C, E-N:
°no; D: svātsanā; em. by LVP (silently); Tib: bdag nyid du
4 P: Ø;
A, E, F, H, I, K, L: vidyamāno; B, C, D, G, J, M: vidyamānām; N:
vidyamānām; em. by LVP (silently) ' P: Ø; A, E: pūr°; D: puner°;
H, I: pur° 6 P: Ø; D: prayojanamm
7 D: anuna
8 A: va; N: om.
9 G, I, K: vākyana 10 C, J, M: sodhya°; D: °gatesya; G: sosādha-
naº; N: sodhyasādhanarmānugatasya
11 G: °prasiddha
sādharmma°; A, E: sādharmma...danam; C, G, I, M: sādharmādrsta-
ntasyotpādanam; F, K, L: sādharma°; H: sādharma...danam; J, N:
°syotpādanam; em. by LVP (silently) 13 C, G, J, M, N: °no; D:
svotmanā 14 D: vidyamānasyebh; I: vidyamānasyatt
15 D: āneva
5
12 Q:
16
Em. with LVP (LVP emends silently): °śah. P, Q: °sah; A, E, , I,
K, L: °şa; B, C, G, H, J, M, N: °sah; D: hetupasamarsa (sa could be
Devanāgarī rā)PsPL 21
5
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
3
4
ne sādhyadharmaparāmarśaḥ ||
vaiyarthyā'
8
tatra yathānityaḥ’ śabdaḥ॰ kṛtakatvāt' | kṛtakam anityaṃ dṛṣṭaṃ yathā
13
21
vaiyarthyāt ||
11
10
12
ghaṭaḥ' tathā ca kṛtakaḥ śabdaḥ | tasmāt kṛtakatvād
tasmāt kṛtakatvād anitya
14
155
15
16
iti kṛtakatvam" atropanayābhivyakto hetuḥ | evam” ihāpi na
19
G7v
17
18
svata " utpadyante " bhāvāḥ svātmanā vidyamānānāṃ punarutpāda- A6r J7v
22
24
25
26
27
iha svātmanā” vidyamānaṃ puro 'vasthitaṃ ghaṭādikaṃ punarutpā-
.28
31
29 30
32
dānapekṣaṃ dṛṣṭam | tathā ca mṛtpiṇḍādyavasthāyām api yadi
1 C, G, J, N, M: °vaiyathyād; D: utpādavairyathyād; H: °vaiparthyād
± A, C, E, G-J, L-N: ibhy; em. by LVP (silently) 3 D: ane; I: enena
2
4
5 P: yathā 'nimibya(h); Q:
Em. with LVP (LVP emends silently): Śah. P, Q: °sah; A, E, I:
sādharmaparāmarsah; B, D, E G, K-M: °sah; C : °parammarsah; H:
sādharmaparāmarsa; J, N : paramarsah
yathā na nityah; I: °tya
6 D: śabda 7 P: Ø; Q: krtakatvānityatvāt;
F: krtakrtvāt; Tib: byas pa mi rtag pa'i phyir. See Translation note.
8 G: krtakem 9 I: drsta 10 p: Ø; D: ce 11 F: krtaka
12 P: Ø; A,
19
H: svātmānām
svate
22
23 M: °nām
C, E, G-N: śabda; F: śabde; em. by LVP (silently)
14 M: krkasvam 15 G: evah 16 A, E, H, I: ta; D: ne
18 H: upadyamte; I: utpadyate
vidyasānām; M: °nā 21 A: °vaiyatpādavaiyarthyāt; B: utpādevai°;
C: narutpādavaiyathyāt; F: °vairyarthyāt; G, J: °vaiyathyāt; M, N:
punanutpādavaiyathyāt 2 Tib: 'di na ji ltar : iha Tib construes ji
ltar with de bzhin du ( tathā) of the next sentence.
24 A, E, H, I: vidyamāne
25 A, E, H, I: om.
Tib: gnas zhing gsal ba : ' vasthitam (= 'vasthitam vyaktam)
ghatadi 28 A, E, H, I: om. punarutpādānapeksam drstam | tathā ca
mrtpindadyavasthāyām api yadi svātmanā vidyamānam ghāṭādikam;
D: °paksam; F: °utpādānampeksam; C, G, J, N: °utpādana°; M:
°utpādina° 9 C, G, J, M, N: yathā 30 D: dha; Tib: n.e. ca 31 B,
26 A, E, H, I: om.;
27Q:
29
13 p:
K7r
Ø; D: atitya
17 D: svata
20 I:156
3
5
MGr svātmanā' vidyamānaṃ ghaṭādikam iti manyase | tadāpi tasya svā-
2
CRITICAL EDITION
6
8
9
10
B7T tmanā vidyamānasya nāstya utpāda iti ||
12
7
11
evaṃ " svātmanā vidyamānatvenopanayābhivyaktena punarutpādaprati-
13
14
15
P4v ṣedhāvyabhicāriṇā " hetunā svata eva sāṅkhyasyānumānavirodhodbhā-
19r vanam" anuṣṭhitam” eveti | tat kim" ucyate tad" ayuktaṃ
18
20
21
22
D, G, J, L-N: mrta°; ; K: mrtapinda°; em. by LVP (silently)
yadi
1C, G, M: svātmenā 2P: Ø; E K: vidyamāne; L: vidyamanem
32 F:
...
5
3
C, G, M: ghapatikam; Tib: gal te rang gi bdag nyid du yod pa’i
bum pa la sogs pa yod do snyam du sems na :: yadi svātmanā vidya-
mānam ghatādikam iti manyase
4 C, G, M: manyasa; F, H: manyes-
e; I: manaseh 5 P: Ø; E, H, I, L: tasyah 6 P: Ø; A-C, E-N: svātma-
no; em. by LVP (silently)
vidyamāna; D: vidyamānasva
7
A, E, H, I: vimānasya; C, G, J, M, N:
8 A, E, H: rabhy; D: manasty; F, K:
10 H: itih
11C,
ty; I: sty; L: sbhy; N: nāsbhy 9 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: utpādam; C, G, J,
M, N: upādam; D: unpāda; em. by LVP (silently)
G, J, M, N: eva 12 P: Ø; A-C, E, G-N: °no; F: svātmanom; em. by
LVP (silently) 13 P: °tvenopanayābhivyaktana; A: ºtvainoparayā-
bhivyaktena; B, C, E, F, H-L, N: °tvenoparayābhivyaktena; D: °tve-
nopenayāhivya(?)ktena; G: °vyana; M: vidyamānotvenoparayābhi-
vyaktena; em. by LVP (silently) 14 A, H, I: °utpādahpratimedhā';
C: °pratisedhā°; D: °vyahicārinā; E, E K: °utpādapratimedhā°; G:
°pratimadhyavya°; E, L: °utpādapratimedhā'; M: °pratimedhābhicā-
rana
15 D: evam
16 A, B, E, F, H-L, N: °venam; C, G: °virodho-
dbhovenam; D: °mānanirodhodbhāvam; M: °virodhotbhāvena; em.
by LVP (silently) 17 B: anutistham; C, G, J, N: anusthitam; D: ānu°;
19 I:
21 D:
18
M: anusthitam
C, M: evati; D: e; G: avati; Tib: n.e. eva
vim 20 E, L: tat kim ucyate ta kim ucyate; I: ta kim ucyateh
td (= t virāma d) 22 Q: uktam ayuktam; D: amuktam; F, K: ayukta5
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
2
hetudṛṣṭāntānabhidhānād iti ||
3
5
$30. na cauṃ kevalaṃ hetudṛṣṭāntānabhidhānaṃ na sambhavati paroktadoṣā-
6
I
10
11
rūpasya puro 'vasthita ghaṭasya punarabhivyaktim
15
17
tasyaiva” ceha” dṛṣṭāntatvenopādānaṃ " siddharūpatvāt |
rūpasya
8
9
parihāro— 'pi na sambhavati | kathaṃ kṛtvā | sāṅkhyā hi naivābhivyakta - N7rF5v
12
13
157
14
icchanti |
anabhivyakta-
20
E5v
18
19
ca śaktirūpāpannasyotpattipratiṣedhaviśiṣṭasya sādhyatvāt c8r
16
1
Q: °drstānabhidhānād; A: °drstātabhidhātād; B-E, G, H, J-N: °dr-
stānabhidhānād; F: °drsta-abhidhanād; I: hetumdrstānabhidhānād;
em. by LVP (silently)
bhi°; ; K: hetudrstamttāna
2 H: itih 3 Tib: n.e. ca 4 D: hetustāntāna-
5 N: ta
6 P: Ø; D: mamstevati; F:
°tih
7 A: °dososariharo; B, D-E H, I, K, L: °dosoparihāro; C, G, J,
M: °dosoparidoso; N : padoktadosoparidoso; em. by LVP to parokta-
dosāparihāradoşo on the basis of the dittography in his Paris and
Calcutta mss (= M and N), although he notes that Tib reads otherwise
8
(PsPL 21, n. 2). Tib: gzhan gyis smras pa'i nyes pa ma bsal ba
8 A-
N om.; PsPL: om. 'pi; Tib: yang G: sākhyā
Tib: n.e. eva
10
11
12 H: pasthitasya
F: pase
13 C, G: punarayivyaktim; D: puna-
rahivyaktim; I: om punarabhivyaktim icchanti | tasyaiva ceha drstā-
ntatvenopādānam siddharūpatvāt | anabhivyaktarūpasya ca śaktirūpā-
pannasyotpattipratisedhaviśistasya; J, M N : punarapivyaktim
G, J, M, N: ichati
14 C,
A: vaiha;
18 C, G,
20
19
15 C, G, M: tasyava; J, N: tasyeva
D: cahe; E-H, L, M: veha 17 C, J: °tvenotpādānam; G, M: °tveno-
tvādānam; ; K: drstattatvenopādrānam; Tib: n.e. upādāna
J, M, N: anabhivyarūpasya; D: anebhi° Q: om.; D, G: va A,
B, ; E, K, L: °pratisedhamviśistasya; C, G, J, M: °pratisedhamviśista;
D: śaktirūpāpannasyānpatti..visistasya; H: °rūpāyannasyotpattiprati-
vedhamvisistasya ; N : °pratisedhamvisista; LVP follows the readings
found in M and N which lack the genitive ending and therefore con-
joins °visista with the following word to form ° pratisedhaviśistasā-
dhyatvāt; Tib: skye ba bkag pas khyad par du byas pa ni bsgrub par
bya ba yin pa nyid kyi phyir158
L6v
CRITICAL EDITION
1
2
3
kutaḥ' siddhasādhanapakṣadoṣāśaṅkā | kuto vā hetor viruddhārthatā-
4
5
6
H7V śaṅketi | tasmāt svato 'numānabādhācodanāyām api yathopa-
8
9
10
K7v
varṇitadoṣābhāvāt paroktadoṣāparihārāsambhava evety asambaddham
12
evaitad"dūṣaṇam” iti vijñeyam||
13
PsPL 22
14
5
G8rJ8r §31. ghaṭādikam iti cādiśabdena niravaśeṣotpitsupadārtha -
saṅgrahasya" vivakṣitatvād anaikāntikatāpi " paṭādibhir naiva
15
16
17
18
19
1 C, G, M: kutrah ±P: °do(sāśa)[1]; A, E, E H, I, L: °śakā; C, G, J,
M, N: °samkā; D: °dosośamkā; K: °dāsāśamkā; em. by LVP (silent-
ly) 3 P: Ø; A: hotā; C, D, G, J, M, N: heto; E, E H, I, K, L: hoto; em.
by LVP (silently) 4 A, E, H, I: viruddhārthasamtāketi; ; K, L: viru-
ddhārthaśamtāketi 5 p: (s)+[1]; D: sato 6 P: ⊗; A, E, L: numānu-
māmabodhyacādanāyām; B: numānanumānabodhācādanāyām; D:
nusānabādhācā?≈≈pām; F: numāmabodhyacānahāyāṇmm; C, G, J, N:
numāmabodhācādanāyām; H: as A, °yāmm; I: numānumāmabodho-
cādanāyāmm; K: numāmabodhyacānadāyamm; M: nusāmabodhācā-
danayām; em. with conj. by LVP: 'numāna[vi]rodhacodanāyām; Tib:
rjes su dpag pas 'gal ba brjod pa na. See de Jong 1978: 30.
yathopavasyi(?)nedosābhāvata; B: °bhāvatah; C, G, J, N: °varnitedo-
ṣābhāvata; D: °varṇitedoṣobhāvāt; E: yathopavasmitedoṣābhāvata; F,
H, I, K: yathopavasmitedosābhāvatah; L: yathopavanitedoşābhāvata;
M: °varnitedosābhāvatavata; em. by LVP; Tib: ji skad smras pa’i
nyes pa brjod pa med pati phyir : yathopavarnitadosābhāvat
G, J, M, N: parakta°; D: parāktadoso°
7 A:
8 C,
11
12 I: bhūsa-
14 P: vādiśa-
13
9 A, E, H, I, L: evebhy; D:
emety 10 Q: asambandham; A-C, E-H, J-N: asambuddham; I:
esambuddham; em. by LVP (silently) A: evaitata; D: avaitat; G,
M: evaita; I: evaitatad; N: evetad; Tib: 'di dag :: etat
nam 3 C, G, J, M, N: ghapadikam; F: patādikam
bdena; PsPL om. ca; Tib: ne ca Q: niraveśe°; A: °pitsupardar-
tha°; C, M, N: niravaśesetpit°; D: niraveśesotpitsupadārtha°; G: nira-
sta(?)śeset°; I: nīra° D: vivajitatvāt 17 A, E: anaikānti; D: °ka-
tyapi; F, H, I, K, L: anaikāmti 18 Q: ghaṭādibhir; A, E, F, H, I, K, L:
15
165
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
13
hāryam ||
sambhavati ||
2
puruṣavyatiriktāḥ
§32. atha vāyam' anyaḥ prayogamārgaḥ-
padārthāḥ॰ svata utpattivādinas ta evaṃ na svataṃ utpadyante
6
7
8
12
svātmanā vidyamānatvāt puruṣavad" itīdam udāharaṇam udā-
15
159
3
21
4
16 17
18
§33.
na
yadyapi " cābhivyaktivādina utpādapratiṣedho na bādhakaḥ |
tathāpy” abhivyaktāv” utpādaśabda nipātya pūrvaṃ paścāc
22
623
24
10
19v
F, K:
16 D:
bhi; B: ghatādibhir; C, D, G, J, M, N: ghatādibhi; em. by LVP: patadi-
bhir; Tib: snam bu la sogs pa dag gis
19 Tib: n.e. eva
7
9 M: ta
1 P: ⊗; D: vāmam ± P: Ø; A-C, E-G, I-N: anya; H: atya; em. by LVP
(silently) 3 P: Ø; A: prajoga°; D: pramāga°; G: °mārga; I: °mārg-
tah; Tib: yang na sbyor ba ’di ni tshul gzhan yin te :: atha vāyam
anyah prayogamārgah 4 P: [3](vy).[1](r).(k)t+h; A, E, F, K, L: puru-
satiriktāh; C, M: °vyatiriktamh; G: °vyatiriktam; H: purusatiruktāh; I:
purusatiriktā 5 D: padārthauh; N: °thah 6 I: °vāditas Q: tatra;
H: pata
8 D: eve; H: yeva; Tib: n.e. tata eva
10 A: utya-
dyate; D: utpedyante 11 A-C, E-N: purusaved; em. by LVP. LVP
(PsPL 22, n. 5) reports that ms L reads purusavad but it too reads pu-
rusaved. 12 A, B, D-F, H, K, L: atīdam; C, G, J, M, N: atīvam; I:
atidam; em. by LVP 13 A: udāhāryya; C, G, J, M: udāhāryaḥ; N:
udāhāryyah; Tib: skyes bu bzhin no zhes dper brjod pa 'di nyid dper
brjod par bya’o : purusavad itīdam udāharanam udāhāryam
G, M: yadyasi 5 A, E, H, I, L: cābhivādina; C: cābhivyāktaḥ;
cābhicādina; G: cābhivyaktih; M: cādhivyaktih; Tib: n.e. ca
°prativedho D: ne; H: ta
18 G: °kats D: tathāvy
abhisyevyaktāv
21 G: °Śadvan
L: pūrva A: paścā; M: paścān
14 C,
15
20 D:
19
17
22
2 A, E, H: tipātya 23 A, E-I, K,
24160
M6v A6v
CRITICAL EDITION
cānupalabdhyupalabdhisādharmyeṇotpādaśabdenābhivyakter evābhidhānā
4
B7v ayaṃ pratiṣedho nābādhakaḥ ||
2
5
§34. kathaṃ punar ayaṃ yathokto 'rtho vinaivetthaṃvicārābhidhānāl
7
noº
¹ Em. with LVP (LVP emends silently): cānupalabdhyupalabdhisādha-
rmyeṇotpādaśabdenābhivyakter. P: sādhar(m)myinnotpada°; Q:
°sādharmmeṇotpādaº; A: nupalabdhāpalabdhisādharmeśoᵒ; B: °sā-
dharmeņoᵒ; C, M: cānupalabdhisādharmaṇoº; D: anupalabdhyapaleb-
dhisodharmoṇotpādaśabdenobhivyakter; E, K, L: cānupalabdhya(?)-
palabdhisādharmesoº; F: canupaladhyapalabdhisādharmeņo...vyak-
tar; G: cānupabdhīsādharmmaṇo°; H, I: °dharmeśo°; J: cānupalab-
dhupalabdhisādharmeņoº; N: cānupal(?)alabdhupalabdhisādharmme-
2 C, G, J, M, N: avãº; D: evādidhānād
3 D: pratiṣādhā; I:
repeats pratiṣedho; M: pratiṣodho 4 A, E, H, I, L: °keh; C, G: nā-
dhakāḥ; J, M, N: nādhakaḥ; em. by LVP (silently) 5 C, G, J, N: pu-
narm 6 P: ayam artho; D: aye 7 Em.: yathokto 'rtho vinaivettha-
mvicārābhidhānāl. P attests for the entire sentence: katham punar
ayam artho yathoktacarccām vinaivetthaṇvicārānabhidhānāl labhyata
iti; Q: katham punar ayam yathoktaś cārtho vinaivetthamvicārābhi-
dhānāl labhyata iti; (paper mss for the concerned words:) A: yatho-
ktaḥsvābhidhānam vinaivya≈vicāro; B: yathoktaḥsvābhidhānam vi-
naivetthamvicāro; C, G, J, M, N: yathoktaḥsvābhidhānam vinaivya-
sthamvicāro; D: yathoktaḥsvābhidhānam vinaivetthamvivāro; E, H, I,
K, L: yathoktaḥsvābhidhānam vinaivyatthamvicãro; F: yathoktaḥsvā-
bhidhānam vinaivyarthamvicāro; Tib: yang ji skad smras pa’i don gyi
rjod par byed pa med par rnam par dpyod pa 'di lta bu ’di ji ltar rnyed
(De Jong [1978: 30] judges that Tib's second 'di should be deleted,
but it reflects Skt ayam). LVP, in reliance on Tib, emends the sentence
to read katham punar ayam yathoktārthābhidhānaṇ vinā vyastavicāro
labhyate; although LVP (PsP₁ 22, n. 8) reports that his mss all read
“vinai vyastham vicāro,” ms L reads vinaivyatthamvicāro. I suspect
that the scribe of a ms from which the paper mss descend was dis-
turbed by the sentence (he may have had to deal with a reading likePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
161
1
2
3
5
PsPL 23 labhyata' iti cet | tad ucyate - arthavākyāni hyetāni mahā-
–
mahārthā-
6
8
9
10
ni yathoditam aṅgṛhya pravṛttāni tāni ca vyākhyāya-
11
12
13
14
mānāni yathoktam arthātmānaṃ " prasūyanta iti nātra kiñcid "
ms P's anabhidhānāt) and removed abhidhānāt/anabhidhānāt, add-
ing abhidhānam before vină (cf. Speijer §182, n. 1 on vină construed
with a following word). At least one of the two mss on which Tib is
based appears to have contained the revised sentence. Ms P's ca-
rccām must be the result of deliberate change; the intended construal
of vina with the following ablative was overlooked and accusative
carccam was introduced, which required the change of abhidhānāt to
anabhidhānāt. Ms Q's yathoktaś cārtho may also be the result of de-
liberate change, or it may have come into Q's line because a dittog-
raphy of the akṣara rtho (possibly resulting in the reading yathoktā-
rthārtho) resulted in rthā being read/re-interpreted as ścā.
*LȚ's author appears to have relied on a ms which read as PsP Tib’s
ms(s); he comments: katham punar ayam uktaprayoge ayam vicaro
jñāyatām (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 122, 135 [fol. 2a2]).
H: ta; I: ta
4
¹ A, E, H, I, L: latyata 2 D: vet; F: cait; H: cyat ³ D: yad; G: om.;
¹ A, E-L, N: athavākyāni; C: athavy(?)ākyāni; D: °vā-
khyāni; M: athavyakyāni; em. by LVP. LVP overlooks the reading in
M (Paris) when he reports that his mss read atha vākyāni.
5 A, B,
E, F, H, I, K, L: rhṛtāni; C: ha(?)tāni; D: rhatāni (ºrhṛ?); G, J, M, N:
hṛtāni; em. by LVP, who records that all his mss read hṛtāni (Cam-
bridge reads rhṛtāni), to tāni; Tib: 'di dag ni. De Jong's (1978: 30)
emendation hy etāni is confirmed by P and Q. A: pathoditam; H:
yathāditam A-N: artha; em. by LVP (silently)
8 A: samgrsva;
6
C: samgrhna; G: sagr≈; J: samgṛkṣy(?)a; M: samgṛhū
9 P: om.; G:
tā; M: om.; Tib: de dag
10 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: na ca;
11
D: arthātpādamnam; F: athānmānam; H: athātmānam
śūyanta; D: °ntaḥ; G: prasūyakṣe; H: pramūyamtaḥ
cātra; D: vātra; em. by LVP (silently) 14 C, G, J, M, N: cikid; D:
kivid; I: kimcīd
C, G, M: va
12 P: pra-
13 A-C, E-N:C8v Q4v
162
2
anupāttaṃ' sambhāvyate ||
CRITICAL EDITION
3
4
5
$35. prasaṅgaviparītena cārthena parasyaiva sambandhaḥ nāsmākaṃ sva-
6
D4v N7v pratijñāyā abhāvāt | tataśca siddhāntavirodhāsambhavaḥ| parasya ca
12
8
9
10
yāvad' bahavo doṣāḥ” prasaṅgaviparītāpattyāpadyante"
13
• tāvad
14
15
asmābhir abhīṣyata eveti | kuto nu khalv” aviparītācārya- PsPL24
G8v E6r
nāgārjunamatānusāriṇa॰ ācāryabuddhapālitasya " sāvakāśavacanā-
18
19
21
KBr JBv bhidhāyitvam | yato 'sya paro 'vakāśaṃ labhate | niḥsvabhāva-
"
20
1 P: anupāntam; A: anutpāmttam; C, E, E H-J, L: anutpāttam; G, M:
anutpātta; N: anutpāttan; em. by LVP (silently) 2 F: sabhāsyate; H:
°teh; Tib: srid : sambhāvyate (causative). LVP (PsP1 23, n. 2) recon-
structs Tib’s ma bstan pa... mi srid do as na anupadistam ... sam-
bhavati.
4
A: °viprarītena; F: °viparītāviparitena
3
Q: cārthe; I:
vārthyana G: yara° 6 D: pratijñāyā≈
5
10
7 C, G, J, N: °nirodhā°;
D: sesāh; H, I: dosā;
11 ' P: °viparīta°; A, C-E, I, L: °rītāpatyā°; H: prahsam-
M: °nirodho° 8
M: dosoh
gaviparitāhpatya
D: yovad 9 D: bahavā
13 Q: abhisyanta;
12 C, G, M: tavad; D: tovad
A, C, E, G-J, M, N : abhisyata; D: ahisyata
14 A, E, F, I, K, L: evati;
H: evatih 15 A, E, H, I: salv 16Q: °nārjunamata°; A, H: avipari-
tācāryā°; C: ºnāgārjusamatā°; D: aviparītāvāryanāgārjunasatānusāri-
na; G: ᵒnāgārjumamatā°; J: ºnāgājumamatā°; N: nāgājunaᵒ
°pālitasvam; D: āvarya°; E, H: °pālitasyam; I : °pāritasyam
mevakāśavacanābhidhāyetvam; C: °vacamābhidhāyitvam; E: meva-
kāśavacanābhidhāyitvam; ; L: smevakāśavacānābhidhāyitvam; G,
M: °vacasābhidhāyitvam; H: mekkāśavacanābhidhāyetvam; I: meva-
kaśavacatābhidhāyitvam; K: smevakāśavacanābhidhāyitvam
yeto; I: yatva 20 D: ≈ākāśam; I: 'vaśam; M: cakāśam
21 K: la-
bhete; em. by LVP (silently): labheta
19
A:
17 A:
18
A:PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
163
1 2
3
4
5
6
bhāvavādinā ca sasvabhāvabhāvavādinaḥ prasaṅga āpādyamāneṃ kutaḥ
8
9
prasaṅgaviparītārthaprasaṅgitā| na hi śabda daṇḍapāśikā iva For I10r
10
11
12
13
14
vaktāram asvatantrayanti | kiṃ | satya śaktau vaktur vi-
15
16
vakṣām” anuvidhīyante | tataśca parapratijñāpratiṣedhamātraphalatvāt
17
18
' prasaṅgāpādanasya nāsti prasaṅgaviparītārthāpattiḥ ||
1
A: niḥsvabhāvanādinā; B, C, E-N: niḥsvabhāvabhāvanādinā; D:
niḥsvabhāvehāvavādinā; em. by LVP; Tib: n.e. bhāva: rang bzhin med
par smra bas 2 PSPL: om. ca; Tib: n.e. ca 3 A, E, I: sasvabhāvādi-
naḥ; C, G, J, M, N: svabhāvabhāvanādinaḥ; D: sasvabhāvahāvevādi-
neḥ; F, K, L: sasvabhāvabhāvādinaḥ; H: as A, ºdina; em. by LVP.
LVP (PSP₁ 24, n. 1) reports that his mss read ºnādinaḥ and ᵒnādinā;
M and N (Paris and Calcutta) read ᵒnādinaḥ but L (Cambridge) reads
vādinaḥ. Tib: n.e. bhāva: rang bzhin dang bcas par smra ba la
4 D:
samprasange 5 Q: āpadyamāne; em. by LVP (printing error?): āpa-
dyamāne; Tib: bsgrubs pa na 6 A, B, D-F, H, I, K, L: kṛtah; C, J, M,
N: kṛteh; G: krte; em. by LVP (silently) 7 A: °prasagitā; C, G, M:
om. prasangaviparītārthaprasaṁgitā | na hi śabdā dāṇḍapāśikā iva vak-
tāram asvatantrayanti | kim tarhi | satyām śaktau vaktur vivakṣām
anuvidhīyante | tataś ca parapratijñāpratiṣedhamātraphalatvāt; F: °tāḥ;
I: ᵒviparitārthapragitā; Tib: thal ba las bzlog pa'i don can du thal bar
ga la 'gyur • kutaḥ prasangaviparītārthaprasaṁgitā. LVP (PsP₁ 24, n.
2) reconstructs Tib's Skt as prasangena viparītārthatāprasangaḥ
kutaḥ but the Skt may have read as the mss do. 8 A, B, E, H-L, N:
śabde; F: śa with stroke for i above the line 9 F: dāndapāṇikā
10
11
D: vakṣāmras ¹¹ A, B, E, K, L: asvamamtrayamti; D: asvaman-
trayamti; F: aśvamatrayanti; H: as A, °tī; I, J, N: asvamantrayanti;
em. by LVP; Tib: dbang med par byed pa 12 D: ki
13 F: śatyām
15 H: vivakṣyām
14
A, B, E, F, H-L, N: vaktu; em. by LVP (silently)
16
I: anuvidhihyante 17 A, E, H: °datasya; D: prasangāyādaº; F:
prasagā°; I: prasagāpādatasya 18 D: ºviparītārthapattiḥ; F: prasam-
gavirītārtā°; H: °viparitā°; K: prasamgavirātārtā°
L7rP5r
164
§36. tathā cācāryo
5
6
nirākaroti sma
CRITICAL EDITION
4
bhūya prasaṅgāpattimukhenaiva parapakṣaṃ
2
9
nākāśaṃ vidyate kiñcit pūrvamākāśalakṣaṇāt|
alakṣaṇaṃ prasajyeta" syāt pūrvaṃ yadi lakṣaṇāt ||
10
12 613
14
15
16
17
18
rūpakāraṇanirmukte rūpe rūpaṃ prasajyate |
ahetukaṃ" na cāsty arthaḥ
20
21
3
23
24
kaścid" āhetukaḥ kvacit ||
1 Q: caryo; D: cācāryā; H: caryo 2 F: kūyasā; N: bhūyasyā 3 C, G,
J, N: °mukhainaiva; I: °mukhanaiva
raksā; em. by LVP (silently)
5 D: nirokaroti 'Q: om.
4 A-F, H-M: °pakṣā; G, N: pa-
6
7 D: nā-
9
kisam 8 D: vidyamte F: kicit 10 A: araksanam
5
11 A: pra-
samhyeta; B: prasatyeta; E, F, L: prasahyeta; H: pasahyetaḥ; I: prasa-
14 D: yati
jyatah 12 F: syā; L: syā, half-danda, t 13 D, G: pūrva
15 Em. with LVP: rūpakāraṇanirmukte. P, Q: rūpakāraṇanirmuktam na
rūpam upalabhyate : mss P and Q substitute MMK IVlab for MMK
IV.2ab, the verse-half attested in the other mss and Tib. MMK IV.2cd,
as in the other mss, follows. A, E: rūpakārūṇanirmmukta; B, C, G, J,
K, M, N: rūpakārūna°; D: °nimuktai; F: rūpakārūnanimukte; H: rūpa-
kārūnanirmukta; I: as A, °ktah; L: rūpakārunanirmmukta, with (Ne-
palese-script) wavy line over kt to indicate kte; em. by LVP (silently)
16 A, E: rūye; I: rūpa 17 F, K: rūpa
18 A: prasamhyate; B, E, F, H,
L: prasahyate; G: pasajyate 19 F: ahotukam. LVP (PsPL 24, n. 8)
states that his mss read āhetukam but all read ahetukam. The mss also
read ahetukam when the kārikā is presented in the fourth chapter (P
is damaged; I do not have access to Q's fourth chapter ). Ye (2011a:
68) accepts āhetukam Nāgārjuna uses the form āhetuka when the
metre demands a long syllable (cf. MacDonald 2007: 34), but one is
not required here.
20 D: vā°
21 L: urthah 22 C, G, J, N: kacid
23 G: °ka; LVP emends to ahetukah but makes reference (PsPL 24, n.
8) to the reading āhetukah in his mss. He accepts the reading āhetu-
kah for the kārikā at its occurrence in the fourth chapter and in his1
iti |
2
PsPL25 tathā
5
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
3
5
bhāvas tāvanna nirvāṇaṃ' jarāmaraṇalakṣaṇam |
8
9
prasajyetāsti' bhāvo' hi na jarāmaraṇaṃ vinā ||
10
ityādinā ||
15
11
§37. athārthavākyatvād " ācāryavākyānāṃ mahārthatve" saty aneka- A7r
prayogahetutvaṃ" parikalpyeta ācāryabuddhapālitavākyāny॰ api c9r
|
165
12
B8r
3
13
list of corrections at PsPL 597 corrects the first chapter citation to
āhetukah.
24 G: krcid
PsP1: om. iti 2 H: tathāḥ; M: tadyathā; LVP: tadyathā; Tib: de
bzhin du D: havas
4 D: nivanam 5 A, E, H, I: °na; C: °mara-
namlaksanam; M laksanam 6 A, E, F, H, I: prasahyatāsti; B, L:
prasahyetasti; C, G, K: prasajyatāsti; D: prasajyetosti
7 A: bhāva;
B, C, E-N: bhāvā; em. by LVP (silently)
8 H: om.
9 A, C, D, E, G-
I, M: °na
10 A, E, H, I, L: vinebhyādinā; C, G, J: vinesvādinā; M:
vitesvādinā 11 C, G-I, N: arthārtha° 12 A, E, H: °na; D: āvākyā-
nāya; I: °nā D: mahāthatve
14 Q: anekaprayoganispattihetu-
tvam; A, B, E, E H, I, K, L: anekaprayoganispattihetutvam; D: aneka-
pramoganispatti°; C, G, J, M, N: enekaprayoganispatti; PsP1: °pra -
yoganispattihetutvam; PsP Tib: sbyor ba du ma'i rgyu nyid (n.e. ni-
spatti). It is difficult to explain P’s loss of nispatti on paleographical
grounds. PsP Tib does not copy in PP Tib at this point (PP Tib: sbyor
ba’i tshig du ma dag gi gzhi) but rather translates from PsP Sanskrit.
It would seem that Q and ms v received the interpolated and explana-
tory reading nispatti from ms 8. It is possible that nispatti was in the
ms related to § used by the Tibetan translators, but was not appropri-
ated by them. Q: parikalpet; A-C, E-N: parikalpet; D: parikal-
pya; em. of parikalpet by LVP (silently) to parikalpyate. De Jong
(1978: 30) accepts D's reading which he considers as confirmed by
15166
CRITICAL EDITION
2
kimiti na tathaiva' parikalpyante |
3
4
5
HBv M7r $38. atha syāt - vṛttikārāṇām eṣa nyāyo yat prayogavākya-
vistarābhidhānaṃ kartavyam' iti |
6
9
10
etadapi nāsti'' vigrahavyāvartanyām vṛttiṃ kurvatāpy" ācāryeṇa
13
110v J9r prayogavākyānabhidhānāt ||
12
Tib’s rtog na; rtog nas, however, would be the more usual equivalent
for the gerund parikalpya. The na here more than likely represents
part of the translation for atha, that is, it is the concluding particle of
the oft-attested ci ste ... na (see, e.g., CŚT Tib-Skt Index [Suzuki
1994: 112] where rtog na is listed as translating only present passive,
present participle and optative forms, and the occurrences of rtog na
for kalpyeta, parikalpyate and parikalpyeta are preceded by ci ste).
A, E: °vākyātp; G: °buddhapālivākyāty; N: °vyākyāvy; em. by
LVP of °vākyāny to °vyākhyānāny, even though his mss support the
reading °vākyāny and he notes (PsPL 25, n. 3) that Tib “= vākyāni";
Tib: ngag dag.
16
1 C: tatheva; D: tatyeva; Tib: n.e. eva 2 A, E, H: parikalpet; B: pari-
kalpyate; C, M, N: parikalpānte; F: parikalpante; G: parikalpāke; I:
parikalpeta; K: parikal(?)pamte; L: parikalpamte; em. by LVP (silent-
ly) 3 D: smād 4 Q: °kāranām; A, C: °kāranām; D: vrttikorānom;
F: °kānānām 5 A, E, F, H, I, K: tyāyo; C, G, M: nyāvo 6 A, C, E,
; H-J, L, N: payogavākyavistarā°; B, G, M: °vistarā°; K: yayogava-
kyavistarā; em. by LVP (silently)
7 A: kartarvya
nāsti 9 A, E, H, I, L: vigrahavyāpattatyām; B, J: °vyāpattanyām, C:
°vyāparttinyām; D: °vyāvattanyām; ; K: °vyāpattavyām; G: °vyāpa-
ttimnyā; M: °vyāpattinyām; N: °vyāpattamnyām; em. by LVP: vigra-
havyāvartanyā. LVP states that all his mss read vigrahavyāpattibhyām
(but see L, M and N). Tib: rtsod pa bzlog pa'i
10 D: vrtti 11 A, B,
8 E: tāsti; F:
E, G, J-M: kurvatopy; C, I, N: kurvvatopy; F: kūrvatopy; H: kurdhato-
py; em. by LVP (silently)
12 C, D, G, I, M: ācāryana; H: ācāryena;
K: ācāyemna 13 D: prayāgavākyānebhidhānāt
5PsPL 26
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
N8r K8v
§39. api cātmanas tarkaśāstrātikauśalamātram ācikhyāsor
aṅgīkṛtamadhyamakadarśanasyāpi yat svatantraprayogavākyābhidhānam' G9r
5
4
167
2
6
tadatitarām anekadoṣasamudāyāspadam asya tārkikasyopa-
lakṣyate | kathaṃ kṛtvā| tatra yat tāvad etad uktam
8
9
10
11
3
.12
13
prayogavākyaṃ tv etad bhavati – na paramārthata " ādhyātmi-
15
18
16
kāny āyatanāni
āyatanāni " svata" utpannāni vidyamānatvāc
19
1 D: vāt°; ; K: cātmatas 2 A: tarkarśāstātikau°; C, G, J, M, N: tar-
kaśāstrādi°; D: terkaśāmtrātikauśalampātram 3 A-C, E, F, H-N: ā-
vikhyāsār; D: avikhyāsor; G: āvisyasār; conj. by LVP: āvi[ścikīrṣayā];
Tib: bstan par 'dod pas 4 Q: °madhyaka°; A, E: °darśasyāpi; H:
angi...darśasyāpi; I: °madhyamadarśasyāpi; Tib: dbu ma pa'i lta ba
khas len bzhin du yang : angīkrtamadhyamakadarśanasyāpi (dbu ma
pa’i lta ba presumes mādhyamikadarśana ) 5C, G, M: °rom 6 A,
E, F, H-L, N: °samudāyospadam; C, G, M: °samudrāyospadam; em.
by LVP (silently) 7 A, E, G, H, I: °palabhyate; B, F, J-L, N: °pala-
ksate; C, J, M: °palakate; D: tarkikasyāpa°; em. by LVP (silently)
8 A-C, E-N: om.; conj. by LVP: [tatra]; Tib: de la A, E, H, I: yap
10 A, E, E, H, I, K, L: aiva; B, C, G, J, M, N: eva;
11 A-C, E-N: yuktam
9
em. by LVP: evam;
12 P: prayogavākya
Tib: 'di skad du
13
15 D:
14
Q: om.
3A, D, E, E H-L: atad; C, G, M, N: ata; conj. by LVP: [atra]
prayogavākyam bhavati; Tib: n.e. etat: 'dir sbyor ba’i tshig tu ’gyur
ba ni. PsP Tib cites from PP Tib: ' dir sbyor ba'i tshig tu gyur ba ni.
'A-C, E-N: parārtha; conj. by LVP: para[m]ārtha[ta]
16 D, M: āyatenani
ādhyālmikāny
18
17 G: svatantra
utpannāni vidyamānatvāt caitanyavat || iti | kimartham punar atra
paramārthata iti viśesanam upādīyate | lokasamvrtyābhyupetasyotpa-
dasyāpratisidhyamānatvāt pratisedhe cābhyupetabādhāprasangād iti
cet | naitadyuktam samvrtyāpi svata (eyeskip: svata utpannāni
svata utpattyanabhyupagamāt); D: ulpannāni
19 A, E: vidyamā-
tatvātE6v L7v
168
1
caitanyavat ||
CRITICAL EDITION
3
5
iti kimarthaṃ punar atra paramārthata iti viśeṣaṇam upādīyate ||
6
10
utpattyanabhyupagamāt ||
§41. yathoktaṃ sūtre –
4
§40. lokasaṃvṛtyābhyupetasyotpādasyāpratiṣidhyamānatvāt pratiṣedhe
cābhyupetabādhāprasaṅgād iti cet naitad yuktaṃ saṃvṛtyāpi svata
7
8
9
1 A: om. caitanyavat || iti | kimartham punar atra paramārthata iti viśe-
sanam upādīyate || lokasamvrtyābhyupetasyotpādasyāpratisidhyama-
natvāt; B, E, F, H-L, N: °vād; D: caivanyavad; C, G, M: caitavyavod;
em. by LVP 2 C, G, M: kimarthah; E, H-L, N: kimartha; F: kima-
3 D: puner; G: punav; Tib: n.e. punar
tha; em. by LVP (silently)
4 C, G, J, M, N: visesam
em.
5 B, C, E, G-N: upādāyate; F: upādāyete;
by LVP (silently) °C, E, H, J-L: °bhyupatasyo°; D: lokaśamkr-
tyātyuyetasyānpādasyāpratividhyamānatvāt; F: °samvrtyātyūpatasyā-
tpādasyā°; G: °samvrtyātyupatasyo°; I: °bhyupatasyotpāda=tisi-
dhya°; M: °samvrttyātyupatasyo°; N: °bhyupatasyo...mānat; em. by
LVP (silently): °bhyupagatasyo°. De Jong (1978 : 31 ) refers to PsPL
26.3’s cābhyupetabādhāprasangād as support for the reading °bhyu-
petasyo°. 7C: cābhyupata°; D : vātyuyamtabādhā°; F: cātyūpeta°;
G, M: cātyupata°; H: cābhyuyeta°
8 A, E: savrtyāpi; F: savrttyāpi
8
9 I: svatah
10 A, E, H, I: utpatyenabhyu°; B: utpattyenābhyu°; C, J,
N: utpastyenabhyu° (N: utpattyena°?); D: utpatyunatyupagamāt; F:
utpattenetyūpagamāt; G: utpastyanatyu°; K: utpattenabhyu°; L: utpa-
ttyenabhyu°; M: utpastyenatyu°; em. by LVP (silently)
53
sa cāyaṃ
bījahetuko 'ṅkura utpadyamāno na sva
parakṛta nobhakṛta hetusamutpanno neśvarakālāṇuprakṛti-
6
8
9
svabhāvasambhūtaḥ ||
iti |
5 tathā
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
10
11
12
bījasya sato yathāṅkuro॰ na ca yo" bīju
20
dharmatā ||
2
15
16
17
18
na ca anyu tato na caiva tad em
21
iti |
169
4
13
14
caiva aṅkuro |
anucchedamaśāśvata
5
19
4
12 A,
1 C, G, H, M: cāpam; D: vāyam 2 C, G, J, M: °hetukām; D: °hetokā
3 A, E, E H, I: ākula (ā conjoined with preceding word); B: ankula; C,
G, J, M, N: ’kula; D: 'kuram; K: 'mkula; L: '≈ula G: svayumkrto;
M: svayatkrto
5 F, K: om.
6 F, K: om.
7 D: nohaya°; I: °krtoh
8 M: °pano
9 A, E: °prakrtiśvabhāva°; D : naiśvarakālāpra°; ; K:
°kālānupakrtiśva°; L: °kālāmuprakrtiśva°; M: °kālāśuprakrti°
10 D: °karo; F: yathākuro 11 A-N: yā; em. by LVP (silently)
F: bija; B, D, E, H-J, L, N: bījam; C, G, M: bīja; K: bījaḥ; em. by LVP
(silently)
13 G: caivī
14 G: kuro 15 A, E, F, H, I: anyū 16 K:
18
7 A, E, L: vaiva Em.: em (cf. BHSD s.v. em). P, Q: evam;
A-L, N: evam; M: evatadevam; PsP1: evam. See Translation note.
19 I: anuks(?)edama°; em. by LVP (silently): °da aśāś°; Lalitavistara
(Lefmann): °da aśāś°. The metre is not affected by the inclusion of
the m of the mss' ° dam, which I understand as a hiatus bridger. On
the verse’s metrical problems, see Translation note.
20 P: ⊗; D:
dharmajeti (sandhi with following iti); N: dharmma
21 H: °tih
17
ne
F6v
C9vI11r ihāpi vakṣyati'
B8v H9r
170
J9v
K9r G9v
CRITICAL EDITION
2
3
4
5
6
pratītya yad yad bhavati na hi tāvat tad eva tat |
na cānya' api tat tasmān nocchinnaṃ nāpi śāśvatam ||
8
10
iti ||
13
14
15
16
§42. paramatāpekṣaṃ" viśeṣaṇam" iti cet | tad" ayuktam |
5
18
saṃvṛtyāpi” tadīyavyavasthānabhyupagamāt | satyadvayāviparītadarśana - PsP,27
20
19
21
22
23
paribhraṣṭā eva hi tīrthikā yāvad " ubhayathāpi " niṣidhyante "
.
24
25
26
28
tāvad guṇa eva sambhāvyata iti | evaṃ paramatāpekṣam” api
29
A7v viśeṣaṇābhidhānaṃ na yujyate ||
4
3 D: ne
‘D: tovat; H: tācat; I:
6 A-C, E-G, I-N: bhavati; H: bhavatih;
9 P:
1 E K: vaksati 2
A: pratitya
tācan
7
5 M: om.; K: ted
8
Tib: n.e. ca
em. by LVP (silently)
nācchinnam; G, M: °na
10 H: itih
viśesenam; Tib: khyad par du byas :: viśesanam
E, G-N: ce; em. by LVP (silently)
15
Q: om.; F: om.; Tib: de yang
16
Q: om.; D: umuktam C: mamvrtyāpi; I: savr° 18 A, E, H, I:
17
ºbhyūpagamāt; B: °sthānetyupagamāt; D, G, M: °tyupagamāt; F:
°tyūpagamāt 19 A-C, E, G, H, J, L-N: satyadvayādviparītaᵒ; D:
°vipanīta°; ; K: satyadvayādviparitadarśanepari°; I satyadvayādvi-
paritadarśanaparitrasta°; em. by LVP (silently )
21 N: yāvud
22 C, G, J, N : ubhayayathāpi; M: ubhayeyathāpi
23 A: nipidhyamte; B: °dhyate; C, E, M: °dhyamte; ; K, L: tisidhya-
mte; H, I: nisidhyanteh
24 M: tācat
25 H: itih
26 B: emvam; F:
H: ttat; Tib: n.e. tat
11 D: paramatāyaksam
13 M: api
20
12 N:
14 A-
H: torthikā
evem 27 P: (para)matāp[2]; A, E: eramatāyeks; C, G, M: °pekam;
D: °yeksam; F K L : peramatayeks; H: eramatāyech; I eramatāyaks
28 G: ayi
29 G: pujyatePRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
171
2
3
§43. na cāpi lokaḥ svata utpattiṃ pratipannaḥ| yatas tadapekṣayāpi
4
6
viśeṣaṇasāphalyaṃ syāt| loko hi svataḥ parata ityevamādikaṃ
8
9
10
vicāramanavatārya kāraṇāt kāryam utpadyata ity etāvanmātraṃ "
pratipannaḥ||
5 §44. evamācāryo 'pi vyavasthāpayāmāseti" sarvathā viśeṣaṇa-
vaiphalyam” eva niścīyate ||
13
14
N8v M7v
2
1 C, G: rāpi; Tib: n.e. ca
3
A: tokah; D: lakah D: yates 4 D:
tadayekşayopi; H: tadayaksayāpi 5A: viśaisāphalyam; B, C, E-H, J-
N: viśeşasāphalyam; D: viśesesāphalam; I: viśesasāphalya; em. by
9A:
11 H: tāvan°; I:
LVP (silently) 6 D: lokā 7 H: kāyakāraṇāt 8 M: kāryām
Dsr
16
§45. api ca yadi” saṃvṛtyotpattipratiṣedhanirācikīrṣuṇā viśe-
ṣaṇam etad" upādīyate | tadā svato 'siddhādhāraḥ" pakṣadoṣa ¨
17
18
20
Q5r
10 C, G, M: rit; I: it
17 Q:
utpadyarte; E: utpadyamte
āvan° 12 P: ⊗; B: °yāsāseti; I: vevasthā° 13 P: [2](sa)[1].(ai)pha-
lyam; C, G, J, M: viśesena°; D: °vaidaphalyam; ; K: viśeşavai°; H:
°phalam; N: visepena° 14 P: ⊗; A, E, F G, K-M: niściyate; D:
niścīyate; H: nisciyateh; I: nisciyete
15 p: Ø; D: padi 16 Q: °ni-
rācikīrṣuṇa vatad (the akṣaras after ᵒnirācikīrṣuṇa have been erased
and vatad [for etad] viseśanam written as the correction); A, E, H:
°sana; C, G, N: °nirāvikīrsunā; D: °pratisedhanimacikīrsunā; ; K:
°sanā; I: °pratisyedhanirācikīrşanā; M: samvavrtyo...nirāvikīrsunā;
Tib: n.e. pratisedha: kun rdzob tu skye ba dgag par ’dod nas
see previous note; D: atad H: upādiyateh
19 Em. by LVP:
’siddhādhāre. LVP (PsPL 27, n. 5) writes, “La lecture des Mss. n'est
pas constante, ici et infra 30.10.15,” but at this point and at PsPL 30.10,
L, M, N (= Cambridge, Paris and Calcutta ) and the other mss avail-
able to this study concur in reading 'siddhādhāraḥ (asiddhādhāra at
30.15 is in a compound). LVP adds, “Il faut, je crois, lire asiddhādhā-
rah paksa° (cf. 28.4).” 20 A-C, E-L, N: °dose; M: doso; em. by
18
20172
CRITICAL EDITION
1
2
3
Psv āśraya siddho vā hetudoṣaḥ syāt | paramārthataḥ svataś cakṣurādyā-
4
5
111v yatanānām anabhyupagamāt ||
6
8
C10r S46. saṃvṛtyā' cakṣurādidbhāvāda' doṣa iti cet' paramārthata ity
E7r J10r
7
9
10
etat tarhi kasya viśeṣaṇam ||
11
L8r §47. sāṃvṛtānāṃ " cakṣurādīnāṃ
paramārthata utpattipratiṣedhād
utpattipratiṣedhaviśeṣaṇaṃ” paramārthagrahaṇamiti cet' evam” tahy
21
12
13
20
17
18
19
H9V evam eva vaktavyaṃ syāt - sāṃvṛtānāṃ cakṣurādīnāṃ paramārthato PSP,28
22
23
14
24
25
26
27
nāsty utpattir iti| na caivam ucyate | ucyamā” 'pi
30
28
parair dravyasatām ” eva cakṣurādīnām" abhyupagamāt prajñaptisatām
LVP (silently )
6 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: savṛtyā
7 A: °ādisabhāvād; B, E,
1 A-C, E-N: āśrayosiddho; D: °siddhā; em. by LVP: āśrayasiddhau.
2 D: syāta
3 D: prsvataś 4 A: °yatanām 5 B-D, G, M: anatyuº;
F: anatyū°
F, H, K, L: °ādisambhāvād; C, J, M, N: °ādisambhāvād; G: °ādisam-
bhāyād; I: °ādiśambhāvād; em. by LVP (silently)
8 p: ⊗; D: edosa
9 Q: evan; I: atat 10 P: Ø; D: kaisya; G: tasya
12 P: Ø; D: cakṣurāhīnām 13 F: paramārtha; N: °thah 14 A: utpa-
11 I: sāvṛtānā
5
16 M:
18
eva
tte°; C, N: °pratisadhād; G, M: °pratisadhā; H: utpantepratisedhā; I:
° pratisedha 15 F: °viśasanam; G: °pratiśedhaviśesanam; H: utpati-
pratisedhaviseśanam; M: utpattaprasedhaviśesanam; Tib: skye ba
’gog pa'i khyad par yin no; em. by LVP (silently): °visesane
17 P: evan; C, G, M: evamm
Tib: n.e. eva 19 D, G: ca-
ktavyam; N: °vya D: sāmpratānām 21 A, E, H, I: °adinām
22 M: nāty
23 A: atpattir
25 D: caivamm
ucyabhya D: ucyamāno ' A-C, E-N: ucyasatām; em. by LVP:
vastusatām; Tib: rdzas su yod pa nyid du 9 A, E, F, H, I, K, L:
caksuridinām 30 P: Ø; B, D, G, M, N: atyu°; F: atyūpagamātah
20
26 I:
24 A: om.
28
27
29PsPL 29
5
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
173
2
cānabhyupagamāt parato 'siddhādhāraḥ pakṣadoṣaḥ syāditi na G10r B9r K9v
yuktametat ||
3
§48. atha syāt – yathānityaḥ śabda iti dharmadharmiṇoḥ sāmānyam
eva gṛhyate' na viśeṣaḥ | viśeṣagrahaṇe hi saty anumānānumeyavyava-
hārābhāvaḥ syāt| tathā hi yadi ' cāturmahābhautikaḥ' śabdo gṛhyate
6
7
8
9
10
13
14
15
N9r
sa parasyāsiddhaḥ"| athākāśaguṇo" gṛhyate " sa bauddhasya svato”
'siddhaḥ| tathā vaiśeṣikasyāpi śabdānityatāṃ pratijānānasya yadi 1125
16
17
5
3
1 P: ⊗; A, E, H, K, L: dhyātenābhyu°; B, G, M: dhyānenātyu°; C, J,
N: dhyānenābhyuº; D: dhā(?)nenātyupagam(?)ārthat; F: dhyātenā-
tyū°; I: dhyātenābhyupamāgat; em. by LVP: anabhyupagamāt (silent-
ly); Tib: khas ma blangs pa'i phyir dang | 2 H: °dosa D: yathā-
danirtyuh; I: yathā ’nībhyah 4 H: dharmadharmīnoḥ; K: °dharmi-
nāh; N: °dharmmih; Tib: chos dang chos can gnyis spyi; em. by LVP
(silently): linked with the following word to create the compound
dharmadharmisāmānyam. De Jong (1978: 31) points to the com-
pound dharmadharmisāmānyam at PsPL 29.5 which, in contrast to the
case here, has been translated as chos dang chos can spyi, that is,
without indicating Skt's dual declension.
5 I: sāmānem
mānānumeyaivya°; H: °bhāva 7 H: tadā; I: bhatā
9 D: cāturmabhāhautikaḥ
6 D: anu-
8 A: yahi
10 Q: grhyet; A, E, H, I: grhyateta; C, G,
A: °nā
12
M: grhya 11 A, E, H: parato 'siddhah; I: as A, °ddha
13
Q: grhyeta; N: grhāte 14 P: ⊗; A, C, E, G-N: baiddhasya; em. by
17
LVP (silently) 15 F: to; M: svabhāto
16 A-C, E, G-N: °syā; F:
vaiseṣikasyā; Tib: bye brag pa yang; PsPL: om. api 7 A-C, E-N:
śabdo°; I: śabdonityetām; em. by LVP (silently)
F7r174
C10v
CRITICAL EDITION
2
3
4
5
A8r kāryaḥ
kāryaḥ' śabdo gṛhyate sa parato 'siddhaḥ | atha abhivyaṅgyaḥ sa
M8r
6
8
svo 'siddhaḥ| evaṃ yathāsambhavam | vināśo 'pi yadi॰ sahetukaḥ
10
11
12
13
14
sa bauddhasya svato” 'siddhaḥ | atha nirhetukaḥ sa parato 'siddha
16
17
18
15
19
iti | tasmād yathā dharmadharmisāmānyamātram evam ihāpi
21
dharmimātramutsṛṣṭaviśeṣaṇaṃ grahīṣyata” iti cet |
I
5
9 F:
12
1 H: kārya
2P: grhyata; Q: gṛhyeta; A, D, E: gṛhyete; C, G, M:
gṛhyata; F, J, K, L, N: gṛhyeta
3 D: parāto 4 D: dasiddhaḥ 5 Q:
vānyaḥ; A: vyāryā; B, J: vyangyaḥ(?); C, D, G, M: vyamgāḥ; E, F, I,
K, L: vyargyaḥ; H: vyargah; PsP₁: vyangyaḥ; Tib: mngon par gsal bar
byas pa yin (abhivyaktaḥ). Cabezon (1992: 279), translating from the
quotation of the passage in the sTong thun chen mo, records mngon
6 G: svate
par gsal bar bya ba.
7 I: eve 8
G: sabhavam
10 N: svataḥ
yayi
11 N: om.
13
Q: om. P: nirahetukaḥ; A:
nirhatukaḥ; D: nihe° 14 G: paro 'siddhaḥ; em. by LVP: parasyāsi-
ddha; Tib: pa rol po la ma grub. Earlier in the paragraph, pha rol po la
ma grub translates parasyāsiddhaḥ (its complement bauddhasya svato
'siddhaḥ is translated rang nyid sangs rgyas pa la ma grub pa yin);
gzhan la ma grub translates parato 'siddhaḥ (its complement svato
’siddhaḥ is translated rang la ma grub). The form parataḥ attested in
the mss may be considered the complement to svataḥ (the second
instance of bauddhasya svato 'siddhaḥ is translated sangs rgyas pa
rang la ma grub pa yin). 15 C, G, J, M, N: om.
16 N: yasmād
19 G: evas;
17 C: yathāte; G, M: yathātre 18 I: °sāmātyamātram
conj. by LVP: e[va gṛhyate (half daṇḍa) e]vam. Tib merely clarifies
with its preceding 'dzin pa what is understood through anuvṛtti in the
Skt; see de Jong 1978: 31. 20 A, E, H, I: grahīpyata; C, D, M: grahi-
syeta; G: grhīsyeta; L: grahī≈yata
21 A: catPRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
5
1
3
4
PsPL30 na̭ḥ caitade॒vam | yasyadaivotpādapratiṣedho ' sādhyadharmo
175
6
'bhipretaḥ| tadaiva dharmiṇas tadādhārasya viparyāsamātrāsāditā-
8
9
10
tmabhāvasya' pracyutiḥ svayam evānenāṅgīkṛtā | bhinnau” hi
viparyāsāviparyāsau"| tad yadā " viparyāsenāsat sattvena gṛhyate "
12
13
14
H10r
19
17
18
taimirikeṇeva” keśādi' tadā " kutaḥ sadbhutapadārthaleśasyāpya
21
23
L8v
20
22
upalabdhiḥ | yadā cāviparyāsād abhūtaṃ nādhyāropyate vitaimi- J10v G10v
1 A, E, E H, I, K, L: ta 2 G: tasmād; Tib: 'di ltar :: yasmāt
,
yadaivātpāda°; I: °pratisyadho; M: °pratisadho; Tib: n.e. eva
3 D:
4 D:
9
tre 5 A, E, H, I: pratas; D: hipretas 6 A, E, F, H, K, L: dharmiņes;
G: dharmmenas; I : dharmmines 7Q: °mātrasāditā°; D: °ātmahāva-
sya; N: viparyyāsemāditātma°
8 F: °ti; I: pratpratih 9 A: avāne-
nāgīkṛtā; D: evānenāmngīkṛtā; E, I, L: avāneº; G: evātenāṁgīkṛtā; H:
avanenāmgikrtā; Tib: 'dis rang nyid kyis khas blangs pa nyid :: sva-
yam evānenāngikrta
10 D: hinnau 11 D: viparyāsāviyayāsau
12 Em. with LVP (LVP emends silently): yadā. P, Q: yathā; A-H, J-N:
yathā; I: yathāpi; Tib: gang gi tshe 13 A, B, E, F, H-L, N: viparyāse-
nosat; C, G, M: viparyāseno; D: viparyāsenosat, after o, samvrtih
syād | ata evokta (= eyeskip forward [end of paragraph]) but then
deleted by enclosure in square brackets; em. by LVP (silently) N:
grhyete 15 A, E, H: temitirikeneva; B, F, K, L: temi°; C, G, J, M, N:
tami°; I: temitirakeneva; em. by LVP (silently) 'M: keśodi
17 G: tada 18 I: kuta
19 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: °padārthalaśa°; C:
sadbhūtaparārthalasyāpy; D: sudbhūtapadārthalaṣesyāty; G: sambhū-
taparārthalasyāpy; J, N : sadbhūtaparārthalasasyāpy; M: sambhūtapa-
rārthalapy; em. by LVP (silently) 20 C, G: apalabdhih; M: āpala-
14
16
21
22 F:
bdhih A, H: cāpiparyā°; D: cāvoyathāsād; Tib: n.e. ca
adbhūtam 23 Q: na samāropyate (°samā° is a correction); A, E, E
H, I, K: nādhāropite; B, C, G, J, L-N: nādhyāropite; D: nādhyoropya-
te; em. by LVP (silently): nādhyaropitam; Tib: sgro mi 'dogs pa.
Yotsuya (1999: 101) retains LVP's reading and assigns de Jongs
(1978: 31) emendation nādhyāropyate (confirmed by ms P) to the176
I12v
CRITICAL EDITION
2
3
rikeṇeva' keśādi' tadā kuto 'sadbhūtapadārthaleśasyāpy upalabdhir
5
K10r yena tadānīṃ saṃvṛtiḥ' syāt ||
8
ata evoktam ācāryapādaiḥ
14
9
10
11
13
yadi kiñcid” upalabheyaṃ” pravartayeyaṃ nivartayeyaṃ vā |
15
pratyakṣādibhir arthai tadabhāvān me 'nupālambhaḥ ||
4
12
iti ||
16
17
18
yataś caivaṃ॰ bhinnau viparyāsāviparyāsau | ato viduṣām
|
avipa-
20
21
22
23
B9v ryāsāvasthāyāṃ viparītasyāsambhavāt kutaḥ sāṃvṛtaṃ cakṣur yasya
variant level. He further reports H, I and J as reading nādhyāropyeta
but none of the three attest this reading.
1 A: vitemirikerameva; B: vitaimirineva; C, E, G, I, J, L-N: vitemi°;
D: vitemitirikeneva; ; K: mirikeneva; H: vitesirikerameva; em. by
LVP (silently) 2 Tib: de’i tshe na yang :: tadā 3 C, G, J, M, N:
kutoh
4 A: madbhūta°; E, H-L, N: sad°; C, G: sad...laśasyāpy; D:
’sabhūtapadārthalaśesyāpy; F: °padārthalenasyāpy; M: satbhūtada-
6 D:
19
5
rthalasasyāpy
tadānām; I: °nī
Tib: adds kyang
Q: tvena; C: syana; G: yāna; M, N: yana
7D: °ti; G: savrtih; N: damvrtih 8 F: yevoktam;
9 A: ācāryāpādaih; B: °padair; D: ācāryaryādaih;
10 H: kimci
11 I: upalabhayam. The parasmaipā-
da suffix with upal labh is unusual (as opposed to its use in Pali);
perhaps BHS?
H: ācāryayadai
13 C, G,
12 I: pravarttayayam; J: pravarttaseyam
23
3 C, G, J, M, N: caksu
M: om.; H: °nivarttayepam; N: nivarttayam
M: tyakṣādibhir; N: pratakādibhir
16 B: caiva; Tib: n.e. ca 17 A: viparyyāsāviparyāsāviparyāsav; E, H,
I: °sav
18 B, C, G, J, M, N: eto
19 N: viduhkhām; Tib: n.e. vidu-
20 D: avipayati | vasthāyām; em. by LVP (silently): aviparīta-
sam
vasthāyām
21 D: vipatāmtasyā°; I: viparītasyātasam°
22 A, E, H,
I: kuta
14 H: prataksādibhir;
15 D, G: arthes; M, N: athais
55
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
2
3
dharmitvaṃ' syāditi na vyāvartate 'siddhādhāraḥ pakṣadoṣa āśrayāsiddho
6
8
vā' hetudoṣa' ity aparihāra evāyam ||
177
4
16
10
13
14
§49. nidarśanasyāpi nāsti sāmyam | tatra hi śabdasāmānyam'
anityatvasāmānyaṃ” cāvivakṣitaviśeṣaṃ dvayorapi saṃvidyate na v
śūnyatāśūnyatāvādibhyāṃ" saṃvṛtyāṅgīkṛtaṃ
18
evaṃ” cakṣuḥsāmānyaṃ
19
20
21
nāpi॰ paramārthata iti nāsti nidarśanasāmyam ||
11
1
11
N: ᵒtva 2 1: ta
3 Tib: ldog pa med pa nyid pas · na vyāvartate
[...] iti 4 Em. by LVP (silently): 'siddhādhāre 5 Tib: gzhi ma grub
pa'i phyogs kyi skyon dang gzhi ma grub pa’i gtan tshigs kyi skyon
• ’siddhādhāraḥ pakṣadoṣa āśrayāsiddho vā hetudoṣaḥ. Cp. Tib §45
(= LVP 27.8) gzhi ma grub pa’i phyogs kyi nyes pa ’am | gzhi ma
grub pa'i gtan tshigs kyi skyon for a reflection of the same construc-
tion with vā. 6 C, G, M: dosar 7 D: āparihāra; F: eparīhāra; K, L:
aparīhāra
8 H: yevāyam
⁹ C, G, J, M, N: nidarśasyāpi
10 P:
śāmyam; G: māhātmyam Q: śabdasāmānyamānyam; C, G, M:
śabdamsãº; D: vadasāmānyam; H: saṣṭaṣāmānyam; I: śabatsāmānyam
12 A, E: atityasāmānyam; B, F, H-J, N: anityasāmānyam; C, G, M:
om.; K, L: anityamāmānyam; conj. by LVP: anitya[tā]sāmānyam; Tib:
mi rtag pa nyid kyi spyi 13 A, E, F, K: vāvivarjitaviśeṣa; B, C, G, J,
M: vãº; D: vovivakṣitaº; H: cāvivarjitaviśeṣa; I: vāviva≈itaviśeṣa; L:
vāvivajitaviseṣa
14 H: ᵒteh 15 A: amva; C: amñ; E, F, H, I, K, L:
eva; G: añ; M: am 16 A: °sāmānya; I: cakṣusãº
dibhām; B, K: °vādityām; D: śunyatāvādityām; F: śūnyatāśūnyatāvā-
tyām; G, M: °vādityāt 18 Q: sāmvṛtyā°; A, E, H, I: gīkṛtam; D:
samvṛtyāmgākṛta; F: āgākṛtam; G: mavṛtyā°; K, L: rgīkṛtam
B, E-N: nopi; C: no pa; em. by LVP (silently)
|
20 D: nyasti
nidarśanasāmānyam; A: nidarśanāsāmyam; F K: sāmānyam; em. by
LVP (silently): nidarśanasya sāmānyam. De Jong does not record D's
variant. Yotsuya (1999: 105, n. 114) relegates H, I and J's reading to
the variant level. Tib: dpe la yang 'dra ba yod pa ma yin (the closing
phrase mirrors the opening line of this specific refutation).
17 A: śūnyatāvā-
A,
19
21 Q:
N9v E7v
Q5v C11r P6r
D5vABv
F7V
M8v H10v
|13r
178
1
3
4
850. yaś cāyam asiddhādhārapadoṣodbhāvane vidhiḥ | eṣa eva
5
6
9
sattvā' ity asya hetor asiddhārthatodbhāva yojyaḥ | itthaṃ PsP.31
13
14
caitad
evaṃ" yat svayamapy" anenāyaṃ yathokto 'rtho 'bhyupa-
gatas
10
CRITICAL EDITION
15
16
17
tārkikena | kathaṃ kṛtvā |
18
19
20
evādhyātmikāyatanotpādakā hetvādayaḥ | tathā tathā - 5
-
26
santy
21
22
24
gatena nirdeśāt | yadyanirdiṣṭam
23
25
5
A: satvā≈
1 G, H, M: paś2 P : asiddhādhārah pakşadosodbhāvane; A: asiddhā-
dhārayakşadoşāhābhane; B, C, G, J, N: °dosādbhāvane; D: asiddhya-
dhārapaksadosodbhāvena; E, I, L: °dosāhāvane; F: asiddhadharape-
kşadoşāhārane; H: asiddhadhārayakşadosahāvane; K: °dhārapekşado-
sābhārane; M: °dosātbhāvane; em. by LVP (silently) 3 A, E, H, I:
om.; B, C, F, G, J-N: vidhin; em. by LVP (silently) 4 A, E, H, I: sa;
D: eşā. LVP (PsP1 30, n. 5 ) mistakenly reports that his manuscripts
attest esa eva sattvādibhyah svahetor.
6 A: ~~; B, C,
E-N: asva 7 A: cr
8 A, E, H, K, L: asiddhārthatāhāvane; B:
°ārthatādbhāvane; D: °ārthavodbhāvane; F: °ārthāhāvane; I: as A,
°na; M: °ārthatotbhāvane. Tib: gtan tshigs 'di la ma grub pa'i skyon
brjod pa la :: asya hetor asiddhārthatodbhāvane. Tib's skyon provides
symmetry with nyes pa (dosa) of the compound in the relative clause.
LVP adds a conjectured api (PsPL 30.16: asiddhārthatodbhāvane ['pi]
yojyah) on the basis of Tib's yang (gtan tshigs 'di la ma grub pa'i
skyon brjod pa la yang sbyar bar bya' o). yang may represent api but it
may more likely be an interpretation of the ca found at the beginning
of the sentence. 9 C, G, J, N: yājyah 10 G: naitad; M: raitad
12
13
Tib: 'dis rang nyid kyis : svayam apy anena
3 C, D,
11 P: eva
G, M, N: anenoyam
14 A, D-E I, K, L: 'tho; H: tho; M: 'rpyo
15 D, F, G: tyupagatas 16 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: tārkikeśa; D: tārkikaṇa
17
18 A, B, E, H, I: saty;
PsPL: om. katham krtvā; Tib: ji ltar zhe na
C, N: sans; G: sanm; M: sam
19 D: evādhyānmikāyatenonpādako;
H: amvādhyatmi°; I: avādhyātmi°; M: evādhyātmi:kāya°
hatvādayah; G: detvādayah
|
0
20 D:
21
1 Q: gatena 22 C, J: niderśāt; D:5
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
2
tat tathā | tadyathā śāntaṃ nirvāṇam ||
5
iti'
3
6
asya paropakṣiptasya sādhanasyedaṃ dūṣaṇam abhihitam anena
9
10
12
13
ko hi' bhavatām' abhipreto 'tra hebarthaḥ saṃvṛtyā tathā
16
11
.
20
svato” hetor asiddhārthatā | paramārthataś” cet”.
179
23
24
25
26
27
na san nāsan na sadasan dharmo nirvartate yadā |
15
17
18
tathāgatena nirdeśād” uta" paramārthata iti | vṛtyā" cet K10v
24 G:
vinirdeśat 23
tathā
25 A, B, E, F, H, K, L: tathāgatenā; C, G, M: gatenā; I:
tathāgate; J, N: gathāgatenā; em. by LVP (silently): tathāgatenāsti
26 Q: nirddastan; G: nirddestan
3 I: a
4 D:
1
6
' Q: abhimatam; D:
8
9 C, G: ehipratā; D: ahi-
11 D: hetvairthah; H:
D: om.; H: tat tathāh 2 F: śanta; G, K, M: śānta
paroyaksiptasya 5 C, D, G, M, N: °asyadam
ahihitem 7 Tib: n.e. hi. The passage has been copied (with minor
changes) from PP Tib. 8 Q: bhagatām
pretā; M: ehipraptā; N: abhipratā
10 G: gra
hatv° 12 A, G: savrtya; E, H, I: °tya
de; F, H, K, L: nirded
15 G: u
16 C: paramāta; G: °te; I: paramā-
rtha; M: pamāta; PsP Tib reflects PP Tib's don dam par gsungs pa’i
phyir 17 C, M: °tya; G: savrtya
13 M: om.
14 A, E, I: nir-
18 D: vet; N cat 19 A: satya; B,
20
21
C, G, J, L-N: svatā; D: syatā; E, F, H, I: satā; K: tyāta; em. by LVP
(silently) 20 A-C, E-G, I-N: °to; H: asiddhārthatva; em. by LVP
(silently). D adds: | tadyathā | śāntam nirmānam (sic) iti (= eyeskip
back to end of first PP citation in §50 [ PsPL 31.3] ) A: paramā-
rthanaś; F: paramarthata; I: °tas 22 A-N: ceta; em. by LVP (silent-
ly)
23 H: nam
24 I: samn
A, E, F, H, I, L: nāsun
sadaśad 27 A-C, E, G-J, L, M: nivartyate; D: nirvartyate; F, K: niva-
rtyata; N: nivatyāve; em. by LVP (silently)
26 P:
25
A: ≈i; D: i; I: bhi. PsP Tib mirrors PP Tib.
J11r
G11r
L9r180
CRITICAL EDITION
1
sadasadubhayātmakakāryapratyayatvanirākaraṇāt tadā
4
kathaṃ nirvartakoṃ hetur evaṃ sati na yujyate ||
5
7
8
naivāsa nirvartako heturiti vākyārthaḥ | tataś ca paramārthato
nirvartyanirvartakatvāsiddher asiddhārthatā viruddhārthatā" vā
10
12
hetoḥ ||
9
iti ||
13
14
15
yataś caivaṃ॰ svayamevāmunā nyāyena" hetor asiddhir aṅgīkṛtā-
18
16
B10r N10r nena tasmāt sarveṣv" evānumāneṣu vastudharmopanyastahetukeṣu
19
1 P: sadaśad°; Q: °nirākanāt; A: °ātmakakāyapratyaya°; C, G, J, N:
°ātmeka°; E, H, I, K, L: °ātmakakāyāpratyaya°; F: °ātmakāyāpratya-
yatvanirākaranot; M: °āmeka°; em. by LVP (silently)
2 P: nirvatta-
tako; A-C, E-N: nivarttako; em. by LVP (silently) 3 A, E, H, I, K, L:
eva; F: aiva 4 Em.: na. P, Q: hi; A-N: hi; PsP1: hi; PsP Tib: mi. See
note on MMK I.7 ( Translation §143). 5 D: naivasmai; M: °so
6 A, B, D-I, K, L, M: nivarttako; C, N: nivattako; J: v(?)ivattako; em.
by LVP (silently)
7 N: °thāh
8 I: tatahś
9N: parathato
10 Em. with LVP (LVP emends silently ) : nirvartyanirvartakatvāsi-
ddher. P: nirvatya°; Q: °nirvvartakāsiddher; A, B, E, H, I, K, L: ni-
vartyanivarttaka°; C, G, J, N: nivarttakatvā 'siddher; D: nivartyaniva-
rtyakatvādasiddhair; F: nivartyanivarttakrtvā ’siddher; M: as C, om.
avagraha 11 D: °to 12 J, N: hetār 13 Em. with LVP (LVP
emends silently): caivam. P, Q: caiva; A-C, E-N: caiva; D: civam;
Tib: de ltar, n.e. ca 14 A-D, F, G, I-N: nāyena; E, H: tāyena; em. by
LVP (silently)
15 A: asiddhi | r; E, H, K, L: asiddhi || r; F: asiddhi r
16 A, E, I, K, L: amgīnena; D: amgīkṛtonena; F: amginena; H: amgi-
18 D: ecānu°; F: evānusānesānesu;
17 A, E, H, I: sarves
namna
Tib: n.e. eva
19 Q: °hetusu; D: vastudharmāpanya°; G, M: °dha-
rmopavyasta°; H: vatsudharmo°
55
PsPL 32
6
hanyante |
2
3
4
5
svataṃ' evaṃ hetvādīnāmasiddhatvāt sarvāy eva sādhanāni vyā-
11
§51. tadyathā
na paramārthataḥ parebhyas' tatpratyayebhyaṃ ādhyātmikāyatana- 113v
9
10
janma paratvāt tadyathā ghaṭasya ||
atha vā
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
14
19
tantvādayaḥ ||
13
12
napare paramārthena vivakṣitāś cakṣurādyādhyātmikāyatana-
pratyayā” iti pratīyante paratvāt tadyathā
15
17
18
nirvartakāḥ
181
8
16
C11v
1 D: svate
± C, G, J, M, N: eve; H: yeva; Tib: rang la : svata eva
4
10
3 A, E, H, I: sarvann; B, E G, J-M: sarvānn; C, N: sarvvānn; D: sar-
vān; em. by LVP (silently) A, E, H, I: evamā; Tib: n.e. eva 5A,
E, F, H, I, K, L: sādhanāvi; M: sādharāni 6 I: °nyate 7 A, C, E, G-
J, L-N: parebhya; B: paretya; D: paratyas; em. by LVP (silently)
8 B, D: °yetya; C: tatpatya°; F: tatpratyebhya; G: tatpatya; I: tapra-
tya°; M: tatpratyaya; N: tatpatya=tya
± A, E, H, I, M: °kāyata-
janma; D: ādhyātmakāyatena°; F: °janme A, E, F, H, I, K, L:
°syā; C, G, M, N: patasya; PsP1: patasya; *LT: ghatasya; PsP Tib:
bum pa; PP Tib: bum pa
11 H: vyā
12 F: ta
13 C: | vevaksitās;
D: vivarjitāś; G: vivakṣiś; N: vicakṣitāś 14 A, B, E, H-J, L: °ātmi-
kāyatanavivarttakāh; C, G, M: °nivattakāh; D: °ātmakāyatenavivar-
ttakauḥ; F: cākṣurādyādhyātmikāyenanivartakā; K: °ātmikāyanani-
varttakāh; N: °kāyatanavivarttakāva; em. by LVP (silently)
pratya
15 I:
16
18 Q:
`D: pratyāyante; N: pratyeyante. De Jong (1978 : 31),
noting D’s pratyāyante and Tib’s nges te, tentatively suggests pratyā-
yyante. P and Q, however, attest pratīyante.
17 I: paratvā
yathā 19 A-N: tatvādaya; em. by LVP (silently)H11r
J11v
182
1
2
3
4
5
iti paratvādikam atra svata evāsiddham ||
6
§52. yathā cānena
9
umā bhāvāsa tadviṣayaviśiṣṭavyavahāra-
utpannā
15
7
10
karaṇāt ||
CRITICAL EDITION
14
11
12
E8r G11v A9r ityasya parābhihitasya
parābhihitasya " hetorasiddhārthatām udbhāvayiṣuṇedam"
uktam
8
N: °yāthātsyam
dayah; M: upadaº
15
atha samāhitasya yoginaḥ prajñācakṣuṣā bhāvayāthātmyaṃ
paśyata utpādagatyādayaḥ santi paramārthata" iti sādhyate
18
19
20
.
13
16
3 D: atu
4
1 C, M: i 2 F: paratvādīkam
5
D: svate A: °ddha
6 P: cānye; A, F, I, K, L: vā°; H: vāneto (o sandhi); M: cānyeno (o
sandhi); Tib: n.e. ca 7 C, G: otpanno (initial o sandhi); D: ātpannā
(sandhi with previous a); M: om.
8 D: evodhyātmika 9 C, G, M:
°os
10 C, M: °vyavabhakaranād; D: °visistatyavyavahāra°; ; K:
tavisaya°; G: °vyavabhākarunād; N: °vyavahākaranād; em. by LVP:
tadvisayivišista°, citing PsP Tib: de dag gi yul dang ldan pa’i tha
snyad khyad par can byed pa'i phyir. See Translation note and the
occurrence below. 11 A, E, H, I: itya 12 I: parābhitasya
13 Em.
with LVP (LVP emends silently): udbhāvayisu°. P, Q: udvibhāva°, A,
E, ; H-L, N: udvibhāvayisuneday; B: udvibhāva°; C: udvibhyavayi-
p(?)uneday; D: udibhāvāyesunedam; G: udvibhyavayipuneday; M:
udvityavayipuneday. I am not aware of the verb ud-viv bhu being at-
tested and am unable to explain the mss' reading. 14E K: ukta
A, E, H, I, L: aya
16 D: °so
17 E K: °yathātsyam; G: °yathā°;
18 D: paśyete; M: paśyatu 19 G: utpādatabyā-
20
A, H: sanni 21 M: paramārtha
17
55
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
4
tadviṣayaviśiṣṭavyavahārakaraṇa siddhārthatā gar
tadā'
5
apy utpādapratiṣedhād eva niṣedhāt ||
6
iti evaṃ svakṛtasādhane 'pi
10
8
9
11
agataṃ naiva gamyate adhvā gatādhvavat |
2
13
12
14
iti adhvatvahetoḥ” svato 'siddhārthatā yojyā ||
183
3
1 D: taddā 2 A: °hetoraṇaher; C, G, H, J, M, N: tadviṣayā°; D: ᵒhe-
tur; em. by LVP: 1) tadviṣayi°, 2) (silently) ºkaraṇād iti hetor, but cp.
adhvatvahetoḥ in Candrakīrti’s following parallel comment. PsP Tib:
de dag gi yul dang ldan pa’i tha snyad khyad par can byed pa'i phyir
ro zhes bya ba'i gtan tshigs; PP Tib: de dag gi yul dang ldan pa'i tha
snyad byed pa'i phyir ro zhes bya ba'i gtan tshigs. See the Transla-
tion note for the previous instance of this reason. 3 A, E, F, H, K, L:
asiddharthaḥtā; C, G, J, M: esiddhā°; D: asīddhārthatā; I: asiddhār-
thaḥātā 4 F: gatet; H: garet 5 A-C, E-N: utpädaniṣedhād; D: utpā-
danisodhad 6 F H: pih 7 P: Ø; D: agadam; I: agata. LVP conjec-
tures a preceding paramārthato on the basis of Tib's don dam par. Q,
A-N: without paramārthato. P's leaf has broken off, but there is just
enough space within the boundaries of the damage for the text as in
the edition above, and no extra space for the conjectured paramartha-
to. See Translation note. 8 A, E, H, I: vaiva; C, G, M: neve 9 F:
gamyamte 10 P: Ø; A: adhatvāt; C: °tād; E, F, H, I, K: adhatvād; G:
adhatan; L: adv(?)atvād; M: °tā 11 P: [3](v)ąd; A, E, F, H, I, K:
gatādhavad; D: ºvah; L: gatādhv(?)ād 12 P: ; A-N: athahetoḥ; em.
by LVP (silently) Em. by LVP (silently): svata evāsiddhārthatā,
apparently on the basis of Tib: rang nyid la ma grub pa’i don nyid
14 C, G, M, N: yājyā; D: yodyā
13
K11r
M9r
F8r114r
184
CRITICAL EDITION
3
4
§53. na paramārthataḥ' sabhāgaṃ cakṣū rūpaṃ paśyati cakṣurindriyatvāt
5
6
tadyathā tatsabhāgam |
tathā'
8
10
na cakṣuḥ prekṣate rūpaṃ bhautikatvāt svarūpavat |
9
11
kharasvabhāvā na mahī bhūtatvāt tadyathānilaḥ |
A: samārga;
3
1 A-N: paramārthaḥ; conj. by LVP: paramārtha[ta]ḥ
D: sambhāgam; conj. by LVP: [sāśrayam]; Tib: brten pa dang bcas
pa'i mig; Stcherbatsky (1927: 115, n. 5) emends to sabhāgam. LVP in
AKBh 1.78, n. 2 refers back to PSP₁ 32 and n. 8 and corrects to sa-
bhāgam. Em. with LVP: rūpam. P, Q: om.; A-N: om.; PsP Tib:
mig ni gzugs la lta bar mi byed; PP Tib: mig ni gzugs la lta bar mi
byed. In AKBht I 78, n. 2, LVP emends rūpam to rūpāṇi. Note, how-
ever, that the AKBh citation sabhāgam cakṣū rūpāni paśyati just a
few sentences previous to Bhāviveka's inference in PP is translated
rten mtshung mig ni gzugs rnams lta (PP D 76b5); only gzugs appears
in the PP inference (PP D 76b7). 4 A: paśyatiś
5 H: tathyatā
6 F, K: ºbhāga
7 Tib: zhes bya ba dang | de bzhin du · tathā 8 C₁
G, M: prakṣate 9 A, E, H: tautikatvāt; C: bhautakatvāt; I: tautikata-
tvāt 10 D: svarūpacat; G: om.; em. by LVP: rūpavat. LVP (PsP₁ 33,
n. 1) incorrectly reports his mss as attesting sarūpavat and states that
he bases his text on Tib's gzugs bzhin no. MHK 3.41ab attests svarū-
pavat. Tib adds zhes bya ba dang between the inferences. A, E, F,
I, K, L: tadyathā alina; B, C, J, M, N: tadyathā || alina; D: tadyathā |
anila; G: tadyathā || ali; H: tadyathā alinar; LVP (PsP₁ 33, n. 2)
emends to tadyathānila (ityādiṣu) but mistakenly reports that his mss
(L, M, N) read tadyathā nalina.
11
PSP₁ 33
55
PsPL 34
1
2
3
4
ityādiṣu' hetvādyasiddhiḥ svata eva yojyā ||
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
5
7
8
9
$54. sattvād iti cāya~ hetuḥ parato 'naikāntikaḥ - kiṃ sattvāc
10
12
13
caitanyavan" nādhyātmikānyāyatanāni " svata
utpadyantām
14
15
utāho ghaṭādivat svata utpadyantām" iti |
18
16
§55. ghaṭādīnām
20
21
cet | naitad evaṃ
yathā
17
api sādhyasamatvān
23
tathābhidhānāt ||
25
26
parakīyeṣv anumāneṣu
30
27
185
nānaikāntikateti
19
28
29
dūṣaṇam uktam |
24
856. nanu ca
ca
evaṃ svānumāneṣvapi yathoktadūṣaṇaprasaṅge sati sa evāsiddhādhārā- H11v
1 Tib: zhes bya ba la sogs pa dag tu yang : ityādisu
2 H: °siddhi; I:
hetvādesiddhih; N °dyahiddhih
3 F: ev; Tib: rang nyid la : svata
eva
4P: Ø; A, E, G-I, K, L: yojya; B, C, D, J, M, N: yojyam; F:
ojya; em. by LVP (silently) 5 P: Ø; A, E, H, I, K, L: setvād; C: sa-
svād; M: sas(?)vād 6 P: Ø; A, C, E, H-J, L, N: cāya; F: vāha; G, K,
M: vāya; em. by LVP (silently) 7F: yetuh; I: hetu
8 H, I: °ka
14
13 P: ⊗; D: °tom; H, I: °tās
15
19
9 P: (s)attvā(c); A, B, E, I, K, L: sattyāc; D, E M: satvā; G: nattvāc; H:
sattyā 10 M: caitavyavat 11 P: °ātmikānyāya(t)a[1]ni; D: °ātmi-
12 D: om.
kānyāyate
[1]+(p).dy.ntām; D: unpannadyantom
blank space with a line over it; H: i
17 PsP1: om. api; Tib: yang
K, L: tānai°; I: tānaikāntikahteti
ven; I: cai; K: cait
G, M: evī; I: avam 23 D: tadyathānahidhānāt; F: ºdhātād; H: tathā-
vidhānāt 24 A, E, I: va; D: ra; H: pa 25 E, H, I: yathām
'I: anamānesu
` A, E, I: i, followed by a
16 A, E, F, H, I, K: ghaṭādinām
18 p: °samatvan; F: °matān 9 A, F,
º A, E, F, H, L: cain; B: ce; D:
21 H: tetad; I: tu(?)tad; K: retad
22 C: evīm(?);
20
26 A:
27
28
parakiyesu; N: parakīyemv
I: duhsanam; N:
°nas
29 M: uktem 30 ° P: ⊗; C, G, J, N: °dūsanampra°; D: yetho-
kta°; M: °dūsanamprasam
L9v
14 P:
N10v B10v
P6v186
D6r Q6r
CRITICAL EDITION
2 3
4
5
6
siddhahatutvādidoṣaḥ' prāpnoti | tataś ca yaś cobhayor doṣo na
10
J12r
8
9
G12r tenaikaś codyo' bhavatīti sarvam etad dūṣaṇam ayuktaṃ jāyata
iti ||
11
12
13
ucyate – svatantram anumānaṃ bruvatāmayaṃ doṣo jāyate| na vayaṃ
14
15
16
svatantram" anumānaṃ prayuñjamahe parapratijñāniṣedhaphalatvād asmada- 5
17
18
K11v numānānām | tathā hi paraś cakṣuḥ paśyatīti" pratipannaḥ”| sa
1P: [8]+(e)tvādidosah; B, D-E H, K, L: °hetvādidosah; C, G, J, N:
evāsiddhārāsiddhahetvādidosah; I: evāsiddhāhdhārā°; M: evāsiddha-
rāsiddhehetvādidosah 2 A, I: nataś 3 Tib: n.e. ca
4 P: Ø; C, M,
N: paś; D: ya | ś; em. by LVP (silently): ya 5 P: [2](yo)r; A-C, E, G-
J, L, N: cobhayo; D: codbhayor; E K: cobhaco; M: cābhayo; em. by
LVP (silently): ubhayor. I presume that ca belongs to the citation. Cf.
PsPL 34, n. 1, where the citation as it appears in the Sarvadarśanasan-
graha is cited by LVP as yaś cobhayah samo doso
6 C, G, M: $0
7C, G, J, M, N: codyā
e
13
14
8 A, E, H, I, M: bhavatiti; F: dbhavatīti;
PsP1: (printing error): bhavavīti 9 A, D, H, I: eta; C, G, J, N: ed; M:
10 M: dusan
11 P: om. svatantram anumānam bruvatām ayam
doso jāyate, possibly due to an eyeskip from °yate of ucyate to °yate
of jayate; A, E, F, H, I, K, L: svatatram; D: svatantrem
12 F: amā-
rna; G: anumānu
C, G: cayam
H: śva°
15 P: prayuñjā-
mahe; A-F, I, J-L, N: prayumjyāmahe; G: prayujyānāähe; H: prayun-
tyāmahe; M: prayujyāmāhe; em. by LVP; LVP incorrectly reports L,
M, and N as reading prayuñjāmahe. 16 Tib: gzhan gyi dam bca’ ba
'gog pa tsam gyi 'bras bu can yin pa'i phyir A: °anumatānām; B:
°nānām; Tib: n.e. asmat Q: param; G: para; em. by LVP: param.
See Translation note.
19 H: paśyatiti
20 H: °nna
17
185
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
2
tatprasiddhenaivānumānena' nirākriyate
cakṣuṣaḥ svātmādarśanadharmam
4
7
icchasi parādarśanadharmāvinābhāvitvaṃ cāṅgīkṛtam| tasmād yatra
13
5
6
187
12
8
10
11
yatra svātmādarśanam'' tatra tatra" paradarśanam api nāsti
14
16
17
tadyathā ghaṭe"| asti” ca cakṣuṣaḥ svātmādarśanam tasmāt para-
3
19
20
21
darśanam" apyasya naivāsti | tataś ca svātmādarśanaviruddhaṃ "
15 H: asti
1
Q: tatprasiddhenānuº; A, C, D, E, G-J, L-N: tatapra°; B: tatampraº;
F, K: tataprasiddhainaivānuna; em. by LVP (silently); Tib: n.e. eva
2 F: nirākriyete 3 Em. with LVP (LVP emends silently): svātmādar-
śanadharmam. P: Ø (only final m preserved); Q: svātmā darśanan
dharmmadarśanam; A: °daśāna°; B-D, F, J-N: °darśanamdharmam;
E: ºdaśanamdharmam; G: svānmādarśanamdharmam; H: syātmā-
daśanamdharmim; I: °daśanamdharmmam 4 De Jong emends to
icchadbhiḥ; see Translation note. 5 Em.: parādarśanaº. P, Q: para-
darśanaº; A: para...bhāvitam; B-E, G, J-N: paradarśana°; F: para...vi-
nātmivitvam; H: para...vināmāvitam; I: paradaśana...bhāvitam. LVP
accepts the reading paradarśanaᵒ. See Translation note. 6 A, E, H:
vāmgī°; F: cāgī°; I: vāmgīkṛta
A: yanna
D: om.
9 A, E, F,
10
A, E, F, H, I, K, L: om.;
8
K, L: °darśanay; H, I: syātmādarsanay
N: tratra
11 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: om.
12 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: om.
13
14 H: ghaṭam; Tib: dper
16 P: cakṣuḥ
19 Tib: n.e. eva
20 P, Q: see
A: sāsti; E: nā || sti; H, I: nāsi; L: nā | sti
na bum pa bzhin no · tadyathā ghaṭe
17 M: tasmā 18 G: °darśaṇamm
following note; Tib: n.e. ca 21 Em. with LVP: svātmādarśanaᵒ
(PSP₁: svā[tmā]darśanaº). P: cādarśanaviruddha (cãº represents the
text's preceding ca conjoined with ādarśanaᵒ); Q: catmadarśanaᵒ
(cãᵒ represents the text's preceding ca conjoined with ātma°); B, E-I,
K, L: svadarśanaᵒ; C, G, M: svadarśananiruddha; D: svadarśana; J,
N: svadarśanaviruddha; Tib: rang gi bdag nyid mi lta ba dang 'gal
bar. sva was presumably dropped by ms (see Stemma) and thus
does not appear in either P or Q; the akṣara tmā was then dropped
from P.
A9v
114v188
C12v
CRITICAL EDITION
nīlādiparadarśanaṃ svaprasiddhenaivānumānena virudhyata iti ||
4
M9v
etāvanmātram asmadanumānair udbhāvyata iti kuto 'smatpa
yathoktadoṣāvatāro॰ yataḥ samānadoṣatā' syāt ||
E8v §57. kiṃ punar anyataraprasiddhenāpy anumānenāsty anumāna-
10
bādhā ||
3
2
8
12
11
asti | sā ca svaprasiddhenaiva hetunā
16
13
|
9
14
na" paraprasiddhena
5
15
17
lokata eva dṛṣṭatvāt | kadācid dhi” loke 'rthipratyarthibhyāṃ
.
18
5
la grub pa'i gtan
14 D: ni; H: om.
PsPL 35
3 P: Ø;
5 H:
8
9 D: anu-
¹ A-C, F, G, I-N: °na; D: om.; E, H: nīrādiparadarśana; em. by LVP
(silently) 2 C, G: svaprasiddhanai°; M: svapraddhinai°
A: amsadanumāner; B, C, E, G, J, K, M, N: °ner; D: °anumānamr; E,
H, I, L: ammadanumāner; em. by LVP (silently). Tib: n.e. asmat (in-
stead gang gi phyir = yasmāt) 4 I: udbhāseta; M: utbhā°
●paksa; I: 'smatyakse 6 A: °domāvatārā; B-N: °rā; em. by LVP
(silently) 7E K: °dosetā; G: °dosātā; H: °dosanā; N: °dosa Q:
om. api; D: °prasiddhenāpy; ; K: abhyatara°; I: anetara°
mānenosty; G: umānemāsty 10 A, E, H, L: anusānabādhya; D, G:
°bādhya; F, K: anusānubādhya; I: anusanabādhya; M: anusānabādhā
11 C, G, M: ra; LVP (PsPL 34, n. 9) reports that his mss read asti sāra,
but this is correct only as regards ms M ( Paris).
dhanaiva
12 A: svaprasid-
13 D: hetumā; M: henā; Tib: rang nyid
tshigs nyid kyis : svaprasiddhenaiva hetunā
15 D: paraipra°; ; K: prasiddhedhenaiva hetunā na paraprasiddhena;
H: om.
16 D: lokate 17 A, C, E, F, G, H-N: vi; em. by LVP (silen-
tly) 18 Q: rthipratyaye rthibhyām; I: 'rthipratya; M: 'thi°2
pramāṇīkṛta sākṣiṇa
kadācit svavacanenaiva
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
8
.
caid
3
4
5
6
vacane yo bhavati parājayo vā
F8v L10r
9
10
11
paravacanena tu na jayo nāpi " parā - N11rH12r
14
12
13
15
jayaḥ | yathā ca loke tathā nyāye 'pi | laukikasyaiva vyava-
.
16
17
18
hārasya nyāyaśāstre" prastutatvāt |
189
19
20
21
5 §58. ata eva ca kaiścid uktam – na parataḥ prasiddhivaśād "
22
23
24
25
anumānabādhā paraprasiddher" eva nirācikīrṣitatvād iti |
1 E H: pramāni°; I: om. pramānīkrtasya sāksino vacanena jayo bhava-
ti parājayo vā kadācit svavacanenaiva paravacanena tu na jayo nāpi
parājayah | yathā ca 2 M: sāksiśo 3 A, E, F, H, K, L: vacanana
D: jayā
5 D: °yā
6 D: vāji
7 A, E, F, H, K, L: kadāci
8 F:
svavacanenaivah; em. by LVP (silently): svavacanena; Tib: rang gi
tshig kho nas
4
9 D: paravaicanena 10C, J, M, N: ja | yo; D jayā;
F: ksayo; G: ja || yo; H: janayo; K: ~yo
11C, G, M: pi
12 G, M:
15 D: pa
13
°yāh
14 H: nyāya
17 C, G, M: °śāstra; D: °Śāsta
20 F K: kais-
16 Q: vyahārasya; H: vyahārasya
18
19 F: cah; Tib: n.e. ca
D: pastutatvāt; N: °tvāta
21 P: °vasād; A, B, D-E H, K, L, N: °balād; C, J: °balod; G:
prasiddhabalod; I: prasiddhabalād; M: prasibalod; PsP1: °balad; Tib:
22
22 D: °bodhā; F, K: anumānubādhā
grags pa'i dbang gis
23 A-N:
parasiddher; LVP retains L, M and N's reading in his edition but
notes (PsPL 35, n. 1) that Tib attests gzhan la grags pa and states,
“Lire paraprasiddher.” 24 A, E, H, I, L: nirāvikirṣatvād; B: nirāci-
kīrṣatvād; C, G, J, M: nirovikirṣatvād; D, N: nirocikīrṣatvād; F: nirā-
siddher eva nirāvikiryatvād; K: nirāsiddher eva nirāvikirṣatvād; em.
by LVP (silently) A: īti; G, M: itī; I: yati; E, K, L: eti
25
Q: om.; D: va; Tib: n.e. ca
J12v B11r
G12v190
CRITICAL EDITION
1
2
3
K12r 859. yas tu' manyate - ya evaṃ tūbhayaviniścitavācī
.
.
5
sa sādhanaṃ
6
8
dūṣaṇaṃ vā nānyataraprasiddhasandigdhavācīti tenāpi laukikīṃ
vyavasthām
14
anurudhyamānena" yathokta" eva" nyāyo" 'bhyupeyaḥ ||
15
16
17
115r 860. tathā hi nobhayaprasiddhenaivāgamenāgamabādhā " | kiṃ” tarhi |
svaprasiddhenāpi | svārthānumā tu sarva svaprasiddhireva garīya- 5
18
19
20
2 H: tamnyate 3 Tib: n.e. eva 4 Q: °vādī; A-C, E,
L
1 Tib: n.e. tu
G, I-L, N: bhūbhaya...vādī; D: bhūtayaviniścitavāgī; F: bhūbhayavi-
niścitatvādī; H: bhūbhayaviniścītavādī; M: bhūbhapa; LVP (PSP₁ 35,
n. 3) records that his mss read bhūbhaya° and emends the text to read
ubhaya°; Tib: n.e. tu (unless the ni after de is intended as such)
5 H:
mādhanam; em. (?) by LVP (silently): pramānam; Tib: sgrubs pa
6 I: duhkhanam 7Em. with LVP (LVP emends silently): nānyatara-
prasiddhasandigdhavācīti. P: nyataraprasiddhasandigdhavācīti (the
initial aksara nā has been lost due to a correction); Q: °vādīti; A:
°prasiddhesadm(?)isadigdhavācīti; B, J, N: °prasiddhesº; C: nāvyata-
raprasiddhesavdigdhavācīti; D: °prasiddhamsamdiścavācīti; E, F, I,
K, L: °prasiddhesadigdhavācīti; G: nāvyataraprasiddheśavdigdhava-
vīti; H: °prasiddhesadidhgavācīni; M: as C, °vāvīti
8 H: nevāpi
9 D: lokikīm; F: laukiktī; G, M: °kī; N: laukim 10 Q: āśrityānumā-
nena (āśritya is a correction; Q's original reading has been erased);
A-C, E-N: anuruddhamānena; D: anurupyamānena; conj. by LVP:
anurudhyamānen[ānumāne]; Tib: 'jig rten kyi tha snyad kyi rnam par
gzhag pa la brten nas rjes su dpag pa la : laukikīm vyavasthām anu-
rudhyamānena ( cp. Q). See Translation note.
11 I: yathākta
om. 6 A, E, H, I: tyāyo; C, G, M: vyāmo A: °ya; D, F, G, N:
'tyupeyah 15 A-N: yathā; em. by LVP
16 A: °prasiddhenavāga-
menāgacādhām; B-C, G, J, N: °prasiddhenavāgamenā°; D: °bodhā;
E, H, I, L: °prasiddhenavāgamenāgabādhā; F, K: tobhayamprasiddhe-
navāgamenāgabādhā; M: notbhayaprasiddhenavāgamenā°; em. by
LVP 17 A: kīm
18 D: svaprasiddhanopi
19 F: °nupāne; LVP
corrects PsPL’s svarthānumāne to svārthānumāne in his "Additions et
12 P:
14
13PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
5
2
PsPL 36 sī | nobhayaprasiddhiḥ | ata eva tarkalakṣaṇābhidhānaṃ niḥprayojana
tadanabhijñavineyajanānugrahād
6
yathāsvaprasiddhayopapattyā buddhais
5
8
ityalaṃ prasaṅgena' prakṛtameva vyākhyāsyāmaḥ ||
191
14
15
na hi¨svabhāvo bhāvānāṃ pratyayādiṣu vidyate|
4
7
10
11
12
§61. parato 'pi notpadyante bhāvāḥ parābhāvād eva | etacca
16
18
19
20
21
ity atra” pratipādayiṣyati | tataśca parābhāvād eva nāpi
parata utpadyante|
22
api ca
20 D: sarvatu
Corrections” (p. 597).
7A:
1 A, E, H, I: gayasī ± G: °pralabdhīh; I: °prasiddhah 3 D: taka≈a-
ksanobhidhānam°; ; K: tarkāla° 4 A: nihsayojanam; D: prayoja-
nam; ; K: nihpa°; G: °na; I: nih || sayojanam 5 Q: yathāsvampra;
A, C-N: yathāsvampra°; B: yathātvamprasiddha°; em. by LVP (si-
lently); Tib: rang la ji ltar grags pa'i 'thad pas
6 N: baddhais
tada | nabhijñavitayaja°; D tadanabhijavineyaijanā; E: tada | nabhi-
jñavinayaja°; H: tadah || tabhijñavinayaja°; I tadanabhijñatinayaja°;
Tib: de kho na mi shes pa'i : tadanabhijña° 8 D: tyākhyāsyāmaḥ;
F: vākhyā°; M: vyākhyāśyāmaḥ; N: vyākhyārsyamaḥ 9 A, B, E, H,
L: nopapadyamte; C, F, G, I, J, K, M, N: nopapadyante; D: nopapa-
dyamtam; em. by LVP (silently) 10 P: bhāvā; A: om.
11 A: parā-
bhācād; D: parābhāvod
12 Tib: n.e. eva
13 Q: evam; C, G, M:
15
4 A, E, H, I: di
evac; Tib: 'di
16
I: °nămh C, M: pratyeyādi-
17 D: atu; G: a; Tib: der : atra 18 A, H: prativādayisyatī; D:
°yisyasi; E, E K, L: prativāda°; I: pratisāda° Tib: n.e. ca 20 A,
E, F, H, I, K, L: parābhāvābhāvād; C, G, M: parāsvavād A, E, H,
I: tapi 22 D: parate; N: pata
14
su
19
21
A10rC13r
H12v
G13r
192
P7r
CRITICAL EDITION
3
4
1
2
anyat tat yadi nāma paro 'bhaviṣyaj jāyeta tarhi bahulaḥ
5
6
śikhino 'ndhakāraḥ |
7
8
9
10
11
sarvasya janma ca bhavet khalu sarvataś ca tulyaṃ paratvam
14
15
M10r J13r ityādinā parata utpattipratiṣedho 'vaseyaḥ” ||
12
13
akhile ke 'pi yasmāt ||
24
iti |
19
§62. ācāryabuddhapālitas" tu vyācaṣṭe'
20
23
na” parata utpadyante” bhāvāḥ sarvataḥ” sarvasambhavaprasaṅgāt |
16
25
26
N11v 863. atrācāryabhāviveko dūṣaṇam āha
-
1 D: anyata; G: anyan 2 D: pratyītya; I: °tye 3 A, B, D, E, H-L, N:
4 A-N: baha-
17 P:
jāyet; C, G, M: jāyat; F: jāye; em. by LVP (silently)
lah; em. by LVP (silently) 5 A, E, H, I: Śisino
’ndhaka≈; N: °ra
7 G: sarvasva
8 D: jatma
10 P: khaluh; Q: kalu; A: khala 11 D: paralaim; H, I: paratom
12 C, G, J, M, N: akhila 13 A-N: janake; conj. by LVP: [']janake
14 D: inā; K: ityāhinā
15 F K: parama
16 G: °prativedho
’vaśeyah; Q: madhyamakāvatārād avaseyah; C, G, M: veseyah; conj.
by LVP (based on Tib): [madhyamakāvatārāt], added after ityādinā.
Tib: dbu ma la 'jug pa las nges par bya'o. See Translation note.
18 A: acāryya° 19 A, E, H, I: vyāvaste 20 A-C, E-N: ra; em. by
LVP (silently)
21 F, K: utpadyate
savarsabhavahpra ; N : sarvasambhuva°
phyir ro || zhes
19
23 H:
22 C, D, G, M: om.
25
24 PsPL: om. iti; Tib: ...
Q: °bhāvaviveko; A: avācāryabaviveko; B, C, E-
N: atrācāryabhāvaviveko; D: atrācāryaryabhāvaviveko; PsP₁: om.
atra; Tib: 'di la slob dpon legs ldan 'byed
26 F: āhah
6
D: 'dhakārah; F:
9 C, G, M: bhavat
5PsPL 37
5
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
5
tad atraṃ prasaṅgavākyatvāt sādhyasādhanaviparyayaṃ kṛtvā svata
6
8
9
ubhayata 'hetuto votpadyate bhāvāḥ kuścat kasyacid
17
iti |
rid
7
3
193
10
11
12
13
utpatter iti prākpakṣavirodha " iti | anyathā " sarvataḥ sarva-
14
15
sambhavaprasaṅgād” ityasya sādhanadūṣaṇānantaḥ pātitvād asaṅga- B11v
16
tārtham etat ||
18
619
20
etad " apy asaṅgatārthaṃ pūrvam eva pratipāditatvād dūṣaṇānta:- Q6v
pātitvāc” ca” parapratijñātārthadūṣaṇeneti" yat" kiñcid etad
23
26
27
F9r
21
L10v K12v I15v
E9r
2 A, E, H, I: om., but leave a space
3 A: mādhya°; C,
4 C, M: krtvāt;
9 A, E, H, I: kasyacicid
1 A, E: tada; D: tay; G: tatrat
with a line drawn over it; F, K: apra; L: apr(?)a
G: °viparyyapan; I: °viparjyayam; M: °viparyapra
G: katvāt
5 D: svate 6 B: ubhayo
7 F: vāh utpadyante 8 A:
kutacit; L: kutasci
10 P, Q: utpattir; F:
utpater 11 P: prākpaksyavirodha; A, E, H, I: prakapaksa°; D: prā-
kapakṣāmvarodha; F, K: prākapakṣaº
13
12 PsPL: om. iti
3 C, M:
14 I: sarvvasabhaprasagād
avyathā
A, E: dhānadūsanānam-
tahyālitvād; B: °dusanānamtahpālitvād; C, G, J, M, N: °palitvād; E
K: dhānadusananantahpālitvād; H dhānadusanānāmtahpālitvād; I:
dhānadūṣaṇānāntapālitvād; L: as A, ºtaḥpālitvād; em. by LVP (silent-
18 A: evamdam; B,
15
ly) 16 I: aśamga° 17 PsP1: om. iti; Tib: zhes
21
C, E-N: etadam; em. by LVP 19 A: amagatārtham; D, M: °tha; G:
asagatārtha; Tib: don 'brel pa med pa ma yin
20 D: pūrvams
N: °tvā 22 P: dūṣaṇānantaḥ°; D: dūṣaṇānte | pātittvā; F: dūṣaṇān-
tanrpatitvāc
23 H: cā
24 C, G, J, M, N: °dusaneti; D: °naiti; Tib:
gong kho nar bstan zin pa'i phyir dang | gzhan gyis dam bcas pa’i don
sun ’byin bar byed pa yin pa dang | sun 'byin pa nyid kyang yin pa’i
phyir :: pūrvam eva pratipāditatvād duşanāntahpātitvāc ca paraprati-
jñātārthadūṣaṇeneti A: yata; D, H: yet Q: kinchid; D: kim-
25
26
27 D: aitad194
1
3
iti na punar'yatna āsthīyate ||
CRITICAL EDITION
2
5
§64. dvābhyāmapi nopajāyantai bhāvā
pratyekam utpādāsāmarthyācca| vakṣyati' hi
10
16
iti ||
12
13
14
syād" ubhābhyāṃ" kṛtaṃ duḥkhaṃ syād ekaikakṛtaṃ” yadi |
ubhayapakṣābhihitadoṣaprasaṅgāt
D6v §65. ahetuto 'pi notpadyante”
619
20
21
hetāv" asati kāryaṃ ca kāraṇaṃ ca na vidyate |
ityādivakṣyamāṇadoṣaprasaṅgāt
22
6
¹ A, E, F, H, I, K, L: puna 2 D: yanna; H: yatsn(?)a 3 D: āsthāya-
te; G, H: āsthiyate 4 C, G, M: noyante; D: lopajānte; F: ≈opa°; I:
nopajñāyante
5 A: bhāvātha 6 A: bhaya...doşasamgrān; C: °pra-
sagāt; E, H, L: °dosasamgrān; F: °dosagrāt; I: °dosasamtrān; J: °pra-
sagān; K: °dosasamgrat 7 A: pranyakam; D, I: pratyakam; F: pra-
tyekamm
8 A, H, I: utpādāsīsāmarthyāc; E: utpādā=āsāmarthyāc
10 H: ti 11 H: sād
12 D: ubhātyām
9 P: vaksyāti; H: vaksyahi
13 A, E, E H, I, K, L: krte
14 A: duhkha; E H: dukham 15 A, C, E-
N: aikaikam; B, D: ekaikam; conj. by LVP: ekaika[krtam]; Tib: re re
byas
16
6 A: itī 17 C: votpadyante; D: notyadyante; H: notedyamte
19 H: kāryāmñ
20 G: om.;
18 A-N: hetov; em. by LVP (silently)
M: °na
21
22
A, E, H, I, M: om. 2 A, C, E, G, H, J, N: iti || vaksya-
māna°; B, E M: iti | vaksyamāna°; D: °māna°; F: iti (space) vaksya-
māna°, I: iti || vaksyamānadosaprasagāt; K, L: iti || vaksyamāna°;
PsP1: iti vaksyamāna°. Tib: zhes bya ba la sogs pas 'chad par ’gyur
ba'i skyon du thal bar 'gyur ba'i phyir
PsPL 38
55
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
2
gṛhyeta va jaga
tpalavarṇagandhauṃ |
8
3
9
ityādidoṣaprasaṅgāc ca||
4
6
7
hetuśūnya eva' gagano- C13v
10
§66. ācāryabuddhapālitas tvāha -
18
iti ||
§67. atrāpy॰ ācāryabhāviveko dūṣaṇamāha -
5
20
195
ya
12
13
14
15
16
ahetuto notpadyante" bhāvāḥ sadā ca sarvataś ca sarva-
17
sambhavaprasaṅgāt ||
1 C, G, I, M: grhyata; H: grheta 2 F: naida 3 A, E, H, I, K, L:
ksagad; F: ksagac
4 F: cadi; G: yahi
5 A: sād
6 F: ≈advad
9 A, E,
7D:e
8 P: °gandhād; A, E, H: ganotpalavarnagamdhav; C, G, J, M:
gaganātpala°; D: gamanovarnagamdhāv; F : gaganotpalavarnagan-
dhād; I: ganotparavarna°; K: as ; °dhāv; N: as C, °varnna°
H, I, L: ibhyādi°; F: °gā 10 A, E, I, K, L: āryabuddhapālita; C, G, J,
M, N: °ta; F: āryabaddhapālita; H: āryabuddhapāli; em. by LVP (si-
lently) 11 B, F, K: notpadyate; D: nānyadyante
12 H: °vā 3 D:
kadā
14 D: cit | 15 D: ata; N: savātaś
17 P: sarvva-
sambhaprasañgād; A, E, H: sava°; C, J, N: °prasagād; D: sambhava-
prasamgād 18 D: ikim; PsPL: om. iti; Tib: zhes
13
16 D: va
19 A-C, E-N: om.
api; PsPL: om. api; Tib: yang
20 A, E, H, I, K, L: °bhāvivekā; B:
°bhāvaviveka, va inserted from above; D: °bhavivekā; F: acāryabhā-
vivekā; I: °bhāvavivekā
H13rG13v J13v
116r
196
CRITICAL EDITION
2
atrāpi prasaṅgavākyatvād' yadi viparītasādhyasādhanavyakti vā- PsPL39
3
5
6
7
kyārthaṃ iṣyate | tadaitad uktaṃ bhavati – hetuta utpadyante bhāvāḥ
8
10
12
kadācit kutaścit kasyacid utpatter" ārambhasāphalyāc
13
14
15
16
17
ca iti seyaṃ vyākhyā na yuktā prāguktadoṣāt ||
18
iti ||
9
11 P: utpadya(n)t(e); Q:
12 Em. with LVP: ārambhasāpha-
1 A, E, H, I: samgavākyatvāt; F: prasaga°; G: pratyaksavākyatvāt
2 P: viparītasya sādhyasādhanavyaktir; A, E, H, I: viparitasādhana-
vyakti; B, C, G, J, M, N: °vyakti; F, K, L: viparītasādhanavyakti; PsPL:
viparītasādhyasādhanavyaktivākyārtha (= conjoined with following
compound); PsP Tib: gal te bsgrub par bya ba dang sgrub par byed pa
bzlog pa gsal ba ngag gi don du mngon par ' dod na 3 C, G, M: vā-
kyārtharit; D: tha; J, N: °thah
4 I: dusyate
5 A: daita; E, H, I:
daitad 6 A, F, K: utpatte; E, H, I, L: utpante
7 G: °ā 8 C, G, M:
om.; I: kadācitta F: kutacit
10N: om.
utpattir; F, G: upatter; I: utpanter
lyāc. P: cārambhasadbhāvād; Q: ārambhasadbhāvād; A, E, H, L: ā-
rambhasammāvād; B, I: ārambhasambhāvād; C, F, G, J, K, M: āram-
bhasambhāvād; D: ārambhasabhāvād; N: as C, °sambhā°; PsP Tib:
rtsom pa 'bras bu dang bcas pa nyid du 'gyur ba'i phyir. The akṣara
pha must have been read or interpreted as dbha, and I of lyā inter-
preted as or changed to va; the rest of the word must have been “cor-
rected” once °sadbhāvāc was thought to be the correct reading. LVP
(PsP1 39, n. 2) erroneously records his mss as reading ārambhasad-
bhāvād iti and °sambhavād iti. 13 Em. with LVP (LVP emends si-
lently): ca. P Q: om.; A-N: om. The aksara cca, of which the lower ca
– prior to reaching mst had probably degenerated to a black
smudge that caused the aksara to be read as t virāma, would have
finally been changed to d (see previous note ) for the sake of sandhi.
15 Q: ⊗; A-C, E-N: vyākhya; em. by LVP
17 D: dosād; G, I: prāguptadosād
18 G: īti
14
G: sayam;
I: syayam
16
(silently) D: yukta
-
5PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
2
4
§68. tad'etad ayuktaṃ pūrvoditaparihārād' ity apare ||
1
197
6
§69. yac cāpyuktam īśvarādīnām upasaṅgrahārtham | tadapi na yuktam
9
10
11
īśvarādīnāṃ svaparobhayapakṣeṣu yathābhyupagamam antarbhāvād "
M10v
2 I: aktam ³ D, M: pūrvāditaº 4 D: apara; N: apa-
Tib: n.e. tat
red iti || || atha khalu tāni daśabhuvaṇasthitadevaputrasahasrāṇibhaga-
vatodharmmadeśanāmanavataramsanavagāhatānāpy
m?)uvyamamāni utthayāsanet yaḥ prakrāntāni || pramuditābhūmisthi-
tādevā imam sarvvadharmān iti || vivalābhūmisthitādevā imam sarva-
dharmān iti || prabhākaribhūmisthitādevā imam sarvadharmān iti
aścimṣmatibhūmisthitadevā ima sarvadharmān iti || suraṁgasābhūmi-
sthitādevā imam sarvadharmān iti || abhimuṣibhūmisthitādevān imam
sarvvadharmān iti || duraṁgamābhūmisthitādevān ima sarvadharmān
iti || acalābhūmisthitādevān ima sarvvadharmān iti || sādhumatibhūmi-
sthitāvān ima sarvvadharmān iti || dhammameghobhūmisthitādevān
imam savadhamān iti || imān tathāgatasya dharmmadeśanām śrutvā
vigatarāgān sarvvadharmmān paśyanti vikalpana paśyanti || dānapāra-
mitām utpāditābhāvanā śīlaparamitām utpāditābhāvanā kṣāntipārami-
tām utpāditābhāvanā vīryyapāratām utpātābhāvanā dhyānapāramitām
utpāditābhāvanā prajñāpāramitām utpāditābhāvanā upāyapāramitām
utpāditābhāvanā praṇidhipāramitām utpāditābhāvanā varapāramitām
utpāditābhāvanāa jñānapāramitām utpāditābhāvanā || evam asvabhā-
vo nanāvaraṇāt || tenākāśasthitena cekasākālam kurvanti || cittamano-
ramasamjñitaśreṣṭāḥ svarṇṇavimānam_j(?)lamtimanojñāḥ (this last
line occurs in PSPM $80) 5 P: om. uktam; A-N: om. uktam; PsP₁:
om. uktam. The translators of Tib appear to have considered īśvarādī-
nām upasangrahārtham to be a citation; these exact words do not
occur in the first chapter of Bhāviveka's PP (Candrakīrti is merely
summarizing). PsP Tib: gang yang dbang phyug la sogs pa nye bar
bsdu ba'i phyir yin no zhes bya ba de yang rigs pa ma yin te : yac
cāpy uktam īśvarādīnām upasangrahārtham tad api na yuktam
E: °ādinām; F: iśvaº; H: iśvarādinām; M: īścaº 7 P: upasangrahār-
thaḥ; D: apaº; F: °tha; G: upasagrahagrahārthan
8 H: iśva°; M:
anadhis(or
K13r N12r N12v
6 A,198
1
L11 iti ||
2
870. tasmāt prasādhitametan nāsty utpāda iti | utpādāsambhavāc
3
6
cauṃ siddho 'nutpādādiviśiṣṭaḥ pratītyasamutpāda' iti ||
CRITICAL EDITION
7
§71. atrāha yadyevam anutpādādiviśiṣṭaḥ pratītyasamutpādo
10
vyavasthāpito bhavadbhir yat tarhi bhagavatoktam"
-
15
nirodhaḥ ||
8
12
13
avidyāpratyayāḥ " saṃskārā avidyānirodhāt saṃskāra-
14
īsva°; N: īśvarādanāṁ 9 D: svaparābha; G: °bhayayaksesu; I:
●paksasu 10 P: yathā cābhyupagamam; A, E, H, K, L: °bhyupagam;
D: yathātyupagem; F: yathātyupagam; I: yabhupagam; M: yathātyupa-
gan
11 C, M: antabhāvād; F, K: attarbhāvād; G: antayāvād; I: abhar-
bhāvād; N: anyabhād
1 A, E, E H, I, K, L: repeat from seyam vyākhyā to iti (with minor
scribal variants ); H begins the dittography with esam vyākhyā; B:
repeats seyam vyākhyā na yuktā prāg uktadosād iti ||; Tib: n.e. iti
2 A, E, I: nāsbhy; F: nāty; H: nārabhy; K: nāḥbhy, (L could be read as
nās (h?) bhy) Tib: n.e. ca (the previous sentence in Tib ends, how-
ever, with la) 4 C, G, M: nutpādiviśistah; D: 'nutpādādiśistah 5 I:
Tib: n.e. iti 7 D, I: yadyavam 8 B anutpādidovisi-
3
6
pratitya ●
stah
10
9E K: vyavasthānapito; em. by LVP (silently ): vyavasthito
A, E, H: bhavatih; D: bhavāmbhah; ; G, I, K, M: bhavati; Tib: n.e.
bhavadbhih 11 A, E, K, L: hemavatārktam; B, C, F, G, J, M, N:
hemavatārkam; H, I: hevamatārktam; em. by LVP (silently); Tib: n.e.
uktam 12 A: °ptatyāyāh; F: °yā; H, I: °pratyāyāh
rādih 4 C, G, M: °nirodhah; F: °dhā; K: °nirādhah
skāranirādhah; C, G, M: om.; E, H, K, L: °nirādhah; I: saskāranira-
dhah. Tib adds a following ces bya ba and in accord with Tib, LVP
(silently) adds iti; LVP does not, however, add iti after the other cita-
tions in this section for which Tib attests a closing zhes bya ba. None
13 D: samskā-
A: mam-
14
15
5PSP₁ 40
1
tathā
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
3
2
anitya saṃskārā utpādavyayadharmiṇaḥ |
4
5
6
utpa' hi niru teṣāṃ vyupaśamaḥ sukham ||
9
10
tathā "
199
of the manuscripts attest iti after ᵒnirodhaḥ.
20:
7
1 C, G, J, M, N: tathāpi; Tib connects the quotations, both here and
before each of the following translated tathās, with a dang
anityāś ca (śca is a correction); C, G, J, M, N: nityā; em. by LVP (si-
lently): anityāś 3 A, E, H, I: vate; B, C, F, J-N: cate; G: cāte; LVP
(PSP₁ 39) retains the reading ca te found in his mss. De Jong (1978:
32) corrects to anityā bata in reliance on ms D, PsP Tib (kye ma mi
rtag) and Udānavarga I.3. 4 I: saskārā 5 A, E, H, I: °vyayadhar-
mitaḥ; F: °vyayadharmi≈ḥ; 6 J: upadya; M: utpadya; N: unpadya
A: tirurudhatte; E, K, L: nirurudhyante; F: ni | rurudhyante; H, I:
tirurudhyante; 8 M: sam 9A, E, H, I: vyupadāmaḥ; C, M: vyupa-
samaḥ; D, N: vyapa°; F: vyupaṣama; G: vyupasanaḥ
10 P: (sukh)ạ+;
A, E, H, I: murkha; C, G, M, N: sukhan; F: mūrkha; K, L: surkha; em.
by LVP (silently): sukhaḥ. See Translation note.
11 P: Ø, damage to
P after sukham is such that approximately the next 10-11 akṣaras are
missing; when the text becomes readable again, the words yaduta
catvāra appear; Q: iti tathā utpādād vā tathāgatānām anutpādād vā
tathāgatānām sthitir aiṣā dharmāṇām dharmatā dharmmadhātus tathā
kāmābhāvaḥ param sukham; A: tathā utpādād vā tathāgatānām utpā-
dād vā tathāgatānā sthitauvaiṣā dharmānā dharmatā; B, C, J, N: tathā
utpādād vā tathāgatānām utpādād vā tathāgatānāṁ sthitaivaiṣā dhar-
māṇām dharmatā; D: tathā utpādād vā tathāgatānām enunpādād vā
tathāgatānā sthitauvaiṣā dharmatā; E, H, I: tathā utpādād vā tathāgatā-
nām mutpādād vā tathāgatānā sthitauvaiṣā dharmānā dharmatā; F, K,
L: tathā utpādād vā tathāgatānām utpādād vā tathāgatānā sthitauvaiṣā
dharmāṇām dharmatāḥ; G: tathā utpād vā tathāgatānām utpādād vā
tathāgatānā sthitaiveṣā dharmānā dharmatā; M: tathā utpādād vā ta-
E9vH13v A11r I16v
C14r F9v
G14r
J14r K13v
200
CRITICAL EDITION
1
3
4
eko dharmaḥ sattvasthita yaduta catvāra āhārāḥ ||
6
8
dvau dharmoṃ lokaṃ pālo' hī cāpatrāpyaṃ ca ||
hrīś
10
ityādi |
tathā
12 13
14
paralokād ihāgamanam ihalokāc ca paralokagamanam ||
11
15
ity evaṃ nirodhādiviśiṣṭaḥ pratītyasamutpādo deśito bhagava-
17
18
tā sa kathaṃ na virudhyata iti ||
16
3 A,
thāgatānām utpādād vā tathāgatānām sthitaivaiṣā dharmāṇā dharmatā;
PSPL: tathā utpādād vā tathāgatānām anutpādād vā tathāgatānām
sthitaivaişā dharmānām dharmatā; PsP Tib: zhes bya ba_dang | de
bzhin_du | de bzhin gshegs pa rnams byung yang rung | de bzhin
gshegs pa rnams ma byung yang rung | chos rnams kyi chos nyid ’di
ni gnas pa kho na ste zhes bya ba dang | See Translation note.
1 P: Ø; A, E, E H, I, K, L: ekau 2 P: Ø; D: °yem; I: °sthitoye
E, H, I: vatvāra
4 F: °rā 5
Q: dharmmo; A, E, F, H, K, L: dhar-
moka; C, G, J, M: dharmo; I: dharmokah; N: dharmā; em. by LVP
(silently) 6 P: ⊗; A, E, H, I: loka; E K, L: lo 7 C, G, J, M, N: pāla-
to; I: pālayeto 8 A, H: hris 9 Q: cāpyatrāpyam; A, B, D-E H-L, N:
°pyaś; C, G, M: cāpatrāpaś; em. by LVP (silently)
10 B: °dih
16
0
17
1¹1 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: ihāgatam; C: ihāgamanebh(?); G, M: ihāgama-
nes; D: iphāgamanam
12 D: ihaloko
13 3 D: om.
14 D: gamanam;
G: palokagamamam
15 F G, H, I: °sta; M nirodhādisistah D:
pratītyasumu°; H: pratityahsam° H: °tāh; I: bhāvatā; Tib: n.e.
bhagavatā A-N: nirudhyata; LVP (PsPL 40, n. 5) retains his mss'
reading but notes, “Le Tib. fournit une lecture préférable: virudhyate
('gal ba). Le sens paraît être katham na sūtravirodhaḥ."
18PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
5
201
1
2
3
4
5
yata̭ḥ' eva hi nirodhādayaḥ pratītyasamutpādasyopalabhyante | ata
.7
8
PsPL 41 evedaṃ madhyamakaśa ācāryeṇa neyanītārthasūtrānta-
praṇītam
10
11
12
vibhāgopadarśanārtham | tatra ya" te pratītyasamutpādasyotpādā-
14
15
daya” uktāḥ", na te” vigatāvidyātimirānāsravajñānaviṣayasva- P7v
16
18
bhāvāpekṣayā | kiṃ” tarhi | avidyātimiropahatamatinayanajñāna-
6
7
9
1 H: eta
± A-C, E, G, I-N: evā; F: ecā; H: yevā; em. by LVP: evam;
Tib: de ltar 3 B, C, G, M, N : ha; J: ham; Tib: n.e. hi 4 P: ⊗; D:
°pādasyāpalatyatye; F I, K: °bhyate; N: °syoparabhyante; Tib: thos pa
(gang gi phyir de ltar rten cing 'brel par 'byung ba'gag pa la sogs pa
dag yod par thos par 'gyur ba) 5 P: Ø; D: atra; J: ate P: Ø; A, E,
F, H, I, K, L: eveda Q: madhyaka°; N: madhyaka°
8 C, G, M:
panītam; H: pranetam A, E, F, H, I, K, L: ācārveṇa; C, D, G, N:
ācāryana 10 p: ne(y)a(n)+[4](nt)+[3]°; A: neyatītārthasūtrānām-
tavibhāgoᵒ; B, J, N: neyatītārthamsūtrāntavibhāgoº; C, G, M: nayatī-
tārthansūtrāntavidbhāgo°; E, H, I: neyatītārthamsūtrānāmtavibhāgo°;
F: neyatīnitārthamvi...ārtha; K: neyatīnītārthamsūtrāntavi...tha; L: as
B, °sūtrāmta°; em. by LVP (silently)
11 M: pa
12 A, E, F, H, K, I:
hate (L’s initial e could be read as ha); C, G, M: eta; Tib: n.e. ete
13 P: pratītyasamutpā(d).[1]tpādādaya; A, E, H, I: pratityasamutpā-
daudaya; B, C, G, J, M, N: pratītyasamutpādodaya; D: pratītyasamut-
pādādasta; F, K, L: pratītyasamutpādaudaya; conj. by LVP: pratītyasa-
mutpād[asyotpād]ādaya 14 A-C, E-N: ukto; em. by LVP (silently)
15
5 D: ta 16 P: vigatāvidyātaimirāṇām sarvajñānām viṣaye svabhāvā-
peksyayā; A, E, F I, K, L: vigatā; B: vigatavidyātainirāśravajñānavi-
sayasvabhāvopeksayā; C, G, J, M: vigatāvidyātainirāśravavisayasva-
bhāvopekṣayā; D: vigatāvidyātaimirāmāśravajñānaviṣaya°; H: viga-
to; N: as C: °visayesva°; em. by LVP: vigatāvidyātimirā[nā]sravavi-
sayasvabhāvāpeksayā; Tib: ma rig pa'i rab rib dang bral pa dag gi ye
shes zag pa med pa’i yul gyi rang bzhin la ltos nas
17 A, E, F, H, I,
K, L: om.; C, G, J, M, N: ki; em. by LVP (silently)
18 A, E, F, H, I,
K, L: om.; C, G, J, M, N: tahy; em. by LVP (silently)202
Q7r
1
viṣayāpekṣayā ||
3
4
N13r §72. tattvadarśanāpekṣayā tūktaṃ bhagavatā
14
iti |
tathā
CRITICAL EDITION
5
6
etad dhi bhikṣavaḥ
saṃskārāś" ca mṛṣā moṣadharmāṇaḥ ||
12
13
vā
O
10
paramaṃ satyaṃ yadutāmoṣadharmaṃ nirvāṇaṃ sarva-
1 P: °nayanajñ+[nā]p+kṣayā; Q: °viṣayāpakṣeyā; A, E, F, H, I, K, L:
vidyātimiropahamati°; D: ºnayamajñānaviṣamāpekṣayā; N: ºjñānavi-
yāpekṣayā; Tib ma rig pa’i rab rib gyi blo gros kyis mig nyams par
byas pa dag gi shes pa'i yul la ltos nas 2 A, E: tatvadaśanā°; D:
repeats the compound; I: tatodarᵒ 3 A-C, E-G, I-M: bhūktam; H, N:
bhūkta; em. by LVP (silently) 4 Q: bhavatā; F: °tāḥ; N: repeats ete
pratītyasamutpādodaya ukto na te vigatāvidyātainirāśravaviṣayesva-
bhāvopekṣayā ki tahy āvidyātimiropahatamatinayanajñvānaviṣayāpe-
kṣayā || tatvadarśanāpekṣayā bhūktam bhugavatā 5 Q: eta; B: om.
etad dhi bhikṣavaḥ paramam satyam yadutāmoṣadharmam nirvāṇam
sarvasamskārāś ca mṛṣā moṣadharmāṇaḥ || iti | tathā nāsty atra tathatā
6 N: bhikṣāvaḥ 7 P: Ø; A, E, H, K, L: parammam; C, G, M:
paraman; D: parama 8 P: Ø; A, E, F, H, I, K, L: bhatyam
A, C: yadutāmoṣadharmā; D: dutāmopadharmam; E-I, J: ṣadutā...-
dharmā; K-M: °dharmā; N: yedutā…dharmā; LVP emends (silently):
°dharma; Q's reading dharmam is also supported by mss P, B and
D's readings for the citation at PSP₁ 237.11-12. 10 P: Ø; A, E, F, H,
I, K, L: virvāṇam 11 C, F, I, K, L: °saskārāś; D: °samskāmāś; H:
samkārā
12 F: maṣā
13 A, E, H, I: mona; D: °dharmyāṇa; F:
noṣadharman 14 Em. by LVP: ityādi; Tib: zhes bya ba la sogs pa;
the damage in P's moṣądharmmā[6]nās(ty a)tra would appear to
allow for the extra akṣara contained in ityādi. Q, however, attests
only iti.
9 P: Ø;
5PSP₁ 42
13
bālalāpinī |
iti|
5 tathā
1
2
3
5
6
nāsty atra tathā vā avithatā vā moṣadharmakam apy
I
7
8
9
10
11
12
etat lodharmakam apy etad mṛṣāpy etat | māyeyaṃ
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
4
15
phenapiṇḍopamaṃ“ rūpaṃ vedanā budbudopamā |
17
18
16
19
marīcisadṛśī sañjñā saṃskārāḥ kadalīnibhāḥ |
20
203
21
māyopamaṃ ca vijñānam uktam ādityabandhunā ||
1
2
5
³ B: om.; D: vāḥ
D: avy
7 A, C,
8 A, B, E, I, L:
13
P: (a)tra; D, G: utra A: tathānā; G: tathābhā
4 D: °to; H: avitathātā
6
G: modharmmakam
E-N: atat; em. by LVP (silently); Tib: 'di dag : etat
pralāpaº; C, G, M: palopaº; F: prulāpāyadharmakam; H: om.; K:
pralāyaᵒ; N: ᵒka; em. by LVP (silently); Tib: n.e. pralopadharmakam
apy etad
9 A, C-E, G, I, J, L-N: atat; H: om.; em. by LVP (silently)
10 A, E, H: mṛṣāp; F, I, K: om. 11 D: etata; F, I, K: om.; G: atat
12 D: māyayam; H: māyaya D: balalopinī; PsP Tib: 'di dag ni
brdzun pa sgyu ma byis pa 'drid pa · mṛṣāpy etad māyeyam bālalāpi-
14 A, C, E-I, K, M: henapindopama; B, J, L, N: ºma; D: phena-
tinṇopamam; em. by LVP (silently) 15 A, E, H, I, K, L: buddhado-
mapām; B: °mām; C, J, N: °mam; D: bubudoyamā; F: buddhadoma-
mām; G, M: ºmam; em. by LVP (silently). 16 A, B, E, H: marīcīśa-
dṛśī; C, G, K, J, L, M: marīcī°; F: maricīsadṛśī; I: marīcīśadṛśi; N:
marīcīmadṛśī; em. by LVP (silently) 17 G: sajñā; I: samjñāḥ
18
A,
E, H, I, K, L: saskārāḥ; F: suṣkārāḥ
L: °nibhābhāḥ; M: kadarī°
D: ādibhyaº; N: adityaº; conj. by LVP: [iti]
nī.
19 A, E, H, I: °nibhāvāḥ; F, K,
20 M: adds following ṛṣām 21
1 P: Ø;
117r
L11v M11r
C14vH14r
B12v
204
CRITICAL EDITION
1
3
4
evaṃ dharmān vīkṣamāṇo bhikṣur ārabdhavīryavān |
divā vā yadi' vā rātrau samprajānan pratismṛtaḥ |
pratividhyet pa śāntaṃ saṃskāropaśamaṃ śivam |
7
9
10
11
12
nirātmatvaṃ ca dharmāṇām ||
13
ityādi ||
¹ P: [1]r(m)ān; A, B, E, F, H-L: dharmani; D: dharmākam – owing to
an eyeskip back to moṣadharmakam, D's scribe repeats the text from
moṣadharmakam up to and including the then correctly scribed dhar-
mān; C, G, M, N: dharmmani; em. by LVP (silently) Em. with
3
5
8
LVP (LVP emends silently): vīkṣamāṇo. P: a(ve)kṣamāṇ(o); Q: ave-
kṣ///; A-C, E, G-N: vekṣamāna; D: avekṣamāṇo; F: vekṣamāṇata
³ Q:0 4 P: [3](y).(v)ān; Q: ///vīryavān; A: ārapravīyavān; D: orab-
dhaᵒ; E, I: °vīyavān A: ≈di 6 G: samprajānam; em. by LVP
(silently): samprajñānan 7 P: pratividdheta, there may be a virāma
under t; A-M: pratividhya; N: pratibimbe; em. by LVP: pratividhyet
A: papeśā; B: pade; C, G, J: padeśa; E, F, H, I, K-N: padeśā; em. by
LVP 9 P: sāntam; F: sāmntam 10 P: samskāropasamam; A, H:
samskāroyamasam; B, C, E-G, J-L, N: samskāropamasam; D: °paśa-
sam; I: saskāroyamasam; M: opasamam; em. by LVP (silently)
N: sim
12 Conj.: nirātmatvam; P: iti | nirātmatvāc; Q: iti || nirāt-
matvāc; A, E, H, I: iti nitātmakatvāc; B, K, L: iti nirātmakatvāc; C, G,
J, M, N: iti || nirātmakatvāc; D: iti nirātmakātvo; F: as B, °kattvāc;
PsP₁: (iti ||) nirātmakatvāc; PsP Tib: chos rnams bdag med pa nyid ·
(the mss') iti nirātma(ka)tvāc ca dharmāṇām, with chos rnams bdag
med pa nyid construed as an object of rtogs par 'gyur (pratividhyet).
See Translation note.
13 B: ityādiḥ
11
55
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
3
4 5
§73. yasyaivaṃ' deśanābhiprāyānabhijñatayā sandehaḥ syāt - kā hy
205
6
7 8
9
10
atra deśanā' tattvārthā kā' nu khalv ābhiprāyikīti' - yaś cāpi॰ G14v D7r
J14v A11v
11
13
mandabuddhitayā " neyārthāṃ" deśanāṃ nītārthām avagacchati|
18
tayor” ubhayor” api vineyajanayor" ācāryo yuktyāgamābhyāṃ
saṃśayamithyājñānayor” apākaraṇārtham idam ārabdhavān | tatra K14r
21
22
23
24
na svata ityādinā”“yuktir upavarṇitā |
19
13
1 H: paśyaivam; I: °vya 2 D: daśanābhiprāyāṇabhijñateyā; N: deśa-
nabhi° 3 A-C, E-N: °deha; em. by LVP (silently) 4 A-C, E-N: ko;
em. by LVP (silently) 5 A, E, F, H, I, K-M: jy 6 C, J, M, N: dar-
śanā: D: deśano; G: darśano 7 A-C, E-N: ko; em. by LVP (silently)
8 A, E, F, H, I, K: ma; L: n(?)a; N: mu; Tib: dgongs pa can ni 'dir
gang zhig yin snyam du · kā nu khalv ābhiprāyikīti, i.e., Tib adds
’dir to the second part of the question (the translators may have mis-
read the aksara nu for the aksara tra) 9 Q: abhi° 10 Tib: n.e. api
11 E, F, I, K, L: bhandaᵒ 12 A, B, E, F, H, K, L: °thā; C, G, J, M, N:
rthā; I: nyāyārthā; em. by LVP (silently) A: meśanā; B, C, E, G,
H, J-N: neśanām; D: neśanā; F: neśatām; I: neśanyam; em. by LVP
(silently ) 14 F: apagacchati 15 A, C-E, G-N: tayār; em. by LVP
(silently) 16 D: uhayor
17 C, J, M, N: °yon; G: °yo
18 D: ācīr-
yā; G: cāryo; M: a 19 A, E, H, I: yukatyāga°; D: yuktyaga°; K, F:
yūrukatyāgamābhyām; G: °tyām 20 P: śamśaya°; A-C, E-N: °mi-
thyājñānamār; D: samśayamidhyājñānayor; em. by LVP (silently):
°mithyājñānāpākaraṇārtham, that is, LVP deletes the final mār (=
degenerated yor) and connects the compound to the following one.
Tib: the tshom dang log pati shes pa dag 21 A-C, E-N: itam; D:
itām; em. by LVP (silently)
22 A, E, F, H, I: ºvāt; D: āraghavān
3C, G, M: isādina A: upavarimatā; E, H, I, K, L: upavanita; F:
upavanitāh
23
24N13v
E10r
I17v
F10r
206
CRITICAL EDITION
1
3
5
tan mṛṣā moṣadharmaṃ yad bhagavān ity abhāṣata |
8
9 10
sarve ca moṣadharmāṇaḥ' saṃskārās tena te mṛṣā ||
11
12
13
14
15
pūrvā prajñāyate" koṭir nety uvāca mahāmuniḥ |
saṃsāro 'navarāgro" hi nāsyādir" nāpi paścimam ||
18
20
19
22
kātyāyanāvavāde cāstīti nāstīti cobhayam |
23
21
24
pratiṣiddhaṃ bhagavatā bhāvābhāvavibhāvinā ||
1 C, G, J, M: mrpā; I: mrkhā 2 P: °dharma; A-C: °dharma; E-N:
°dharma; LVP: °dharma. PsPL’s quarter is unmetrical. 3 A, E, H, L:
yav(?); G: ya; I: yat(?); F, K, M: yat 4F, K: vagavān; G: jñagavān; I:
yagacān Q: abhāsat; A, E, H, I: abhāsat
6 C, G, M: sarva
7 A,
5
I: saskārās
C, M: pra-
E, E H: °na; I: nā; K, L: only upper dot of the visarga
9 A-C, E-N: om.; em. by LVP (silently)
10 D: tam
jñāpate; F, K: prajñāyame; N: prajñā, then repeats, on account of an
eyeskip, from [prajñā]namār apākaraṇārtham itam up to and includ-
ing prajñāyate 12 A-C, E-N: koti; D: kāti; em. by LVP (silently)
13 A, E, H, I, L: ne'ty 14 A, E, L: ūvāca 15 A, E, F, J, K, L: ºni; C:
muhyamuni; G, M, N: muhāmuni; J: ink-dot below initial m (J's des-
cendents read as u); em. by LVP (silently) 6 C, J, N: 'navarā'grā;
D: 'nakarāgo; G, M: °grā
17 A-C, E, F, H-N: rāsmādi; D: °ādi; G:
rātmādi; em. by LVP (silently) D: yeścimam 19 A-E, G-M: kā-
16
18
11
20
tyāyaṇāvavāde; F: kātyātaśācavāde; N: kātyāyaṇāvevāde; em. by LVP
(silently) Em. with LVP: cāstīti; P: cāsti; Q: ca asti; A, B, E, K,
L: ca || asti; C, G: va || asti; D: cā asyi; ; I: ca asti; H: cah || asti; J, N:
ca | asti; M: va | asti. MMK XV7: cāstīti; the syllable is metrically
required. 21 A: om.; B, C, E, E H, J-M: nāsti; D: nāstī; G: nāsti; I:
nā; N: om. LVP (PsPL 43, n. 1) erroneously states that his mss attest
nāstīti. 22 D: codbhayam 23 A, B: °dha; H: pratisīdham
24 1:
°vibhāvanā
PsPL 43
55
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
17
ye" sūtrāntāḥ
1
ityādināgamo varṇitaḥ ||
§74. uktaṃ cāryākṣayamatisūtre
3
5
katameṃ sūtrāntā neyārthāḥ katame nītārthāḥ | ye sūtrāntā mārgā-
ucyante neyārthāḥ | ye sūtrāntāḥ
6
7
9
10
11
vatārā nirdiṣṭāi
12
13
14
15
16
phalāvatārā nirdiṣṭā ima ucyante nītārthāḥ | yāvad
śūnyatānimittāpraṇihitānabhisaṃskārājātānu-
18
2
207
8
1 A-C, E-N: ityādinā agamo; D: ityādināmāgamā; em. by LVP (silent-
ly); Tib: la sogs pa :: ityādinā 2 C: cāryokayamati°; G: caryontaya-
mati°; M: vāryokayamati°; N: °mati
3 N: om. katame sūtrāntā ne-
yārthāh katame nītārthāh | ye sūtrāntā mārgāvatārāya nirdistā ima
ucyante neyārthāh | ye sūtrāntāh phalāvatārāya nirdistā ima ucyante
nītārthāḥ | yāvad ye 4
5
`D: ya; H: e D: sūtrāntrā 6 A, E, F, H, I,
K, L: yārgāva°
7C, J, M: nidista
(silently)
8 A-C, E-M: ita; em. by LVP
9 C, G, M: °thā; H: nyāyārthāḥ
10 H: e
11 I: °tā
12 A, E, F, H, I, K: °yar; D: °rāpa 13 A, F: dinistā; H, I: di || nistā; E,
K, L: di | nistā
16 G: om.
14 A, B, E, F, H, I, K, L: ime 15 D: nayāthāh; I:
tītārthāḥ
18
17 C, M: ya; G: om.
8 P: sūtūāntāḥ; Q:
sūtrāntāḥ ātmasatvajīvapoṣapudgalamanujamānavakārakavedakanā-
nārutabhāşā asvāmikāh svāmikavan nirddistās ta ucyamte neyārthāh
yāvad ye sūtrāntāḥ; F: sutrāntāḥ; G: om.; L: sūtrātāḥ. PsP Tib: mdo
sde gang dag bdag dang | sems can dang | srog dang gso ba dang
skyes bu dang | gang zag dang | shed las skyes dang | shed bu dang
byed pa po dang | tshor ba po dang | sgra rnam pa sna tshogs su bshad
pa dang | bdag po med pa la bdag po dang bcas par bstan pa de dag ni
drang ba’i don zhes bya'o ||; PsP Tib's citation has been copied in
from the Tibetan translation of the Akṣayamatisūtra. See Translation
note.
C15rH14v L12r
208
CRITICAL EDITION
1
tpādābhāvaniḥsattvanirjīvaniḥpudgalāsvāmikavimokṣamukha nirdi-
2
5
ṣṭāḥ'' ta ucyante nītārthāḥ | iyam ucyate bhadanta śāradvatīpu-
8
6
trauṃ nītārthasūtrāntapratiśaraṇatā' na neyārthasūtrāntapratiśaraṇatā ||
¹Q: ºpraṇitānabhi...ābhāvāḥ niḥsatvanirjīvaniṣpudgalā{ḥ}svāmika-
vimokṣamukhā; A: ᵒutpādobhāvaniḥ satvanirjīvanihpra..lātyāmika-
vimokṣamukhā ('..' here and below stands for a space with a line
drawn over it, indicating loss of an akṣara); B: ᵒutpādobhāvaniḥsa-
tvanijīvanihpumgalābhyāmikavimokṣamukhāni; C: ºjātā’nutpādobhā-
D: ºjātā'nutpā-
E: ᵒjātā'nutpā-
dobhāvaniḥ satvanirjivanihpra..lātpāmikavimokṣamikhāni; F: ᵒut-
pādobhāvaniḥ satvanirjivaniḥpungalāsyāmikavimokṣamukhani; G: as
C, double danda; H: ºnimittā | praṇihitānabhisaṁskārājātānutpādo-
bhāvaniḥ || satvanirjivanipra..lātpāmikavimokṣamukhāni; I: ᵒsaskārā-
jātā' nutpādobhavaniḥ satvanirjivatipra..lātyāmikavimokṣamukhāniḥ;
J: ᵒjātā'nutpādobhāvaniḥ | satvanirjīvaniḥpumgalābyāmikavimokṣa-
mukhāni; K: as L, °pun(?)gala°; L: ºjātā'nutpādobhāvaniḥ || satvanir-
jivanihpu≈galātyāmikavimokṣamukhāni; M: as C, °pumgala°; N: as
J: pungalā. Conj. by LVP: °[nirātma]°; PsP Tib: bdag med pa, on
the basis of bdag med pa in Akṣayamatinirdeśasūtra Tib; see Braarvig
1993: II, 118 (Braarvig does not mark nirātma as a conjecture). LVP
(PSP₁ 43, n. 4) notes that his mss read "°ābhyāmika, ᵒsika" for āsva-
mika, but N and L (= Calcutta and Cambridge) respectively read °ā-
bhyāmika, °āṭyāmika while M (Paris) reads ᵒābhyāmi.
2 D, F, K:
nidiṣṭās 3 C, G, M: ᵒta 4 PSP Tib: 'di dag • iyam 5 B, E, F, H,
vaniḥ satvanirjīvaniḥpungalābhyāmimokṣamukhāni;
dābhācaniḥsatvanirjīvaniḥpugalāmyāmikavimokṣam;
8 P:
L: ucyamte; C, G, J, K, M, N: ucyante; I: ucyatya; em. by LVP (silent-
ly) 6 A, H, I: sāradvatī 7 P: nītārthasūtāntaᵒ; Q: ᵒpratisaraṇatā;
A-C, E, I-L: °pratisaraṇatā; F: °pratisaraśatā; G: °sūtrāntāpratisara-
ṇatā; H: ᵒsūtrāmntapratisaraṇatā; N: °sūtrānmapratisaraṇatā
om. sūtrānta; A-N: om. sūtrānta; PsP Tib: mdo sde, copied from
Akṣayamatinirdeśasūtra Tib. A, E: ºpratisaraṇete; B, C, F-N: °prati-
saraṇate; D: °pratosaraṇagate (final e represents sandhi with follow-
ing i); em. by LVP: ᵒsūtrānta
OPsPL44 iti ||
5
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
tathāryasamādhirājasūtre
3
5
nītārthasūtrāntaviśeṣa jānatī yathopadiṣṭa sugate
yasmin punaḥ' pudgala sattva pūruṣoṃ neyārthaṃ tāṃ
7
10
11
dharmān ||
12
iti ||
1
209
6
śūnyatā |
jānati sarva- JIsr
G15r M11v
2 I: nta-
1 A-C, E-N: tathācārya°; I: tathāsūtrā PSPL: tathā cāryaᵒ
viseṣa ³ E, H, I: jātatī; G, J, M: jānetī; em. by LVP (silently): jānati.
SR: jānati. *LȚ's author also found jānatī in his PsP ms, recorded it
and glossed it with jānāti. Ms P at the equivalent for PSP₁ 276.5 also
attests jānatī. The first quarter is in Indravamśā metre, which expects
a long final syllable. On the lengthening of historic i to ī in BHS
verses even in cases of short i at the end of pāda, see BHSG §3.12,
§26.2. 4 P: °diṣṭā; A-C, E-N: °deṣṭā; D: yathoyadiṣyam; em. by
LVP (silently): ºdiṣṭā. SR: ºdiṣṭā. Ms P attests diṣṭām at the equiva-
lent for PSP₁ 276.6. (višeșa can be understood as an accusative [ºșã]
or as a nominative, the latter when one presumes an unstated iti [iti
jānātī].
5 I: śurātena 6 Em. with LVP (LVP emends silently):
śūnyatā. P, Q: °tām; A-E, G-N: °tām; F: sumnyatām; SR: śūnyatā. P
also attests ᵒtām at the equivalent for PsPÅ 276.6.
7 D: pura
8 Q:
poșo; B, J, M: pumgalasatvapuruṣo; H, I, K, L, N: pungalasatvapuru-
șo; em. by LVP (silently): °ṣā; SR: pūruṣo. P attests pūruṣo at the
equivalent for PSP₁ 276.7. 9 A: neyār; C, G, M: nayārtha; E: neyār-
thā; H: nayārthā; I: neyārthāṁ; em. by LVP: neyārthato (LVP reads
neyārthatā(m) as one word. LVP [PsP₁ 44, n. 1] records his mss as
reading “neyārthatā, ᵒtām” but Cambridge and Paris read tām while
Calcutta reads tāñ). SR: neyārthatām. PsP Tib: drang ba'i don tu.
10 P, Q: tā; A, E, H, I: tā; PsP Tib: de. Ms P attests tām at the equiva-
lent for PSP₁ 276.8. 11 P: śarvvadharmān. P attests sarvadharmān
at the equivalent for PSP₁ 276.8. 12 PSPL: om. itiK14v B13r
210
CRITICAL EDITION
5
§75. tasmād utpādādideśanāṃ mṛṣā pratipādayituṃ pratītya-
samutpādānupradarśanam ārabdhavān ācāryaḥ ||
7
2
8
6
10
118r §76. nanu cotpādādīnām abhāve sati yadi " sarvadharmāṇāṃ" mṛṣā-
ārabdhavān ācāryaḥ| nanv
' nanv evaṃ
12
13
14
15
A12r
tvapratipādanārtham idam
22
4
21
16
17
18
19 20
sati" yan" mṛṣā na tad
astīty akuśalāna
25
27
28
karmāṇi” tadabhāvān" na" santi durgatayaḥ" na" santi kuśalā -
`
29
30
31
32
Par ni karmāṇi | tadabhāvān" na santi sugatayaḥ sugatidurgatya-
1 C: tarsmād; E, F, I, K, L: tasmā 2 A, E, H, L: itpādādiº; F, I, K:
ityādādiº; Tib: bstan pa rnams : deśanām 3 A, E H: °thā 4A-C.
E-N: prativādayitum; em. by LVP (silently ) 5Q: °pādānudarśanam;
A: pratityasamutpādānupadarśanām; B, C, G, J, L-N: °pādānupadar-
śanam; D: °pādānuyadarśanam; E, I: °pādānupadarśatām; E K: °sa-
mutpānupadarśanam; H: pratitya...dānupadarśanātām; em. by LVP:
°pādānudarśanam; Tib: rjes su ston pa. Cf. BHSD, s.v. anupradarśita
“pointed out, shown.”
6 P: āraccavān
7F: °ya
' A, E, H, I, L:
vot°; D, J: cāt°; M: cotpādāvīnām
9 H: amāve
8
10 F, I: yadih
12 D: iday; F, K:
17 M:
21
11 A, C, E, G-J, M, N: °nā; D: °dharmavisam
idadh 13 A, E, K, L: anārtham idam ārabdhavān; F: ārārtham idam
ārabdhavāv; H: as A, °bdhamān; I: ānārtham idamam ārabdhavān
14 F: °ya; I: ānāryyah 15 B, D-G, I, K, L: natv
16 I: satī
ya
18 F, K: nad
19 D: astītir; H: astiti 20 A, E, F, H, I, K, L: ne-
vā; B, C, G, J, M, N: ne; em. by LVP (silently) Q: satyam; A:
sanny; C, G, M: sans; H : sann 22 Q: kuśalāni; G: akulāni; H: eku-
śalāti; I: akuśalāti
23 M: kamāni 24 I: tebhāvon
25 A, E, F, H, I,
K, L: ta 26 C: dur≈atayah; D: durgayah; G: adds following ucyante
(eye-skip into next section) 27 C: om.; G, M: om. A, E: Śamti
29 A, E, H, I: kulani 30 P, Q: om.; A: karmmani 31 Q: tadābhāvān;
A, E, H, I: tabhāvā; B, F, G, J-N: tadabhāvā; em. by LVP (silently)
32 I: śugatayah
28
5PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1 2
3
4
5
sambhavāc ca nāsti saṃsāra' iti sarvārambhavaiyarthyam eva syāt ||
211
6
ucyate – saṃvṛtisatyavyapekṣayā laukikasyedaṃsatyābhiniveśasya C15v N14r
10
12
9
7
8
13
11
pratipakṣabhāvena mṛṣārthatā bhāvānāṃ pratipādyate 'smābhiḥ | naiva
18
14
15
17
19
tv" āryāḥ” kṛtakāryāḥ" kiñcid" upalabhante yan" mṛṣā
20
23
21
22
24
5 vāmṛṣā vā syāditi | api ca yena hi sarvadharmāṇāṃ mṛṣātvaṃ ¨
25
26
27
parijñātaṃ” kiṃ tasya karmāṇi santi saṃsāro vāsti| na cāpy
1 A: °sambhavārthab; B: °sambhavādh; C: °sambhavābhavā≈; D:
°bhavā; E, H, I, L: °sambhavārthamb; ; K: °sambhavārtha; G, M:
°sambhavābhavāb; J: °sambhavām; N: °sambhavāb; em. by LVP
(silently) 2 A, B, E, G-J, L-N: dha; C: ≈; F, K: pra; em. by LVP
(silently) 3 Tib: bde 'gro dang ngan 'gro med pa’i phyir 'khor ba
yang (construes ca with samsāra) 4 C, G, J, M, N: °vaimarthyam;
5 A, C, E-N: evā; em.
D: °vaiyathyam; H sarvārammavaiyartham
6 A-C, E, F, H-N: ucyante; G: om.; em. by LVP
by LVP (silently)
(silently)
7Q: °vyapeksāyām; A, E, I, K, L, N: samvrtisasyavya°;
C, G, M: samvrtisasyavyapaksayā; D: °satyavyayejayā; F: sarvavvati-
sasyavyapekṣayā; H: samvṛttisasyavyapyakṣayā; J: samvṛtisasyavye-
peksayā; em. by LVP (silently) 8 P: °nivesasya; A-C, E-G, J-L, N:
loka°; D: lokasyadamsatyādibhini°; H: loka...nivesaśya; I: lokasya-
dam°; M: lāka°; PsPL: loka° D: pratiyaksa°; G: °bhāvana
10C,
G, M: mrsārtha; ; K: °tāh
11 A: bhāvātām
12 Q: pratipādyante;
9
D: pati°
13 A-C, E-N: naive; em. by LVP (silently); Tib: n.e. eva
14 C, G, J, M, N: ty 15 P aryah 16 Q: om.; H: om.; Tib: n.e. krta-
kāryāḥ 17 A, E, H, I: kicid 18 P: upalambhante; A: upabhalanne;
E, H, L: upabhalante; F, K: upalalante; G: upalanbhe; N: upaladbhante
19 G: ya; M: yat; N: yen
20 A, E, H, I: om.; D: vāmrtā; PsPL: om. vā
22 D: cā
21 A: cā
23 A, E, H, I: °nā; D: °dharmārnā; ; K: dhar-
mānām 24 F: mrtvam; Tib: brdzun ba'i don can nyid : mrsātvam
(*mrsārthatvam) Q: parijñānam; A, E, H, I: °tvah; B-D, E G, J-
N: °tah; em. by LVP (silently) 6 D: °rā A, E, F, H: vāpy; I: py
25
26
27
H15rL12v
J15v
212
1
CRITICAL EDITION
3
4
asau kasyacid dharmasyāstitvaṃ nāstitvaṃ vopalabhate ||
5
yathoktaṃ bhagavatāryaratnakūṭasūtre -
cittaṃ॰ hi kāśyapa parigaveṣyamāṇaṃ na labhyate| yan na labhyate tan
nopalabhyate | yan nopalabhyate tan naivātītaṃ nānāgataṃ" na
8
9
pratyutpannam| yan naivātītaṃ nānāgataṃ na pratyutpannaṃ tasya nāsti 5
11
12
svabhāvaḥ | yasya nāsti svabhāvas tasya nāstyutpādaḥ | yasya
nāstyutpādas tasya nāsti nirodhaḥ ||
iti vistaraḥ ||
13
yas" tu viparyāsānugamān mṛṣātvaṃ dharmāṇāṃ nāvagacchati pratītya-
14
15
16
Q7v bhāvānāṃ svabhāvam abhiniviśate | sa dharmeṣv idaṃsatyābhinive-
PsPL 45
2 Q: °āsti-
1 A, E, H, I: kasyavi; D: kasyāmcad; ; K, L, M: kasyaci
tām; A, E, H, I: °tva; N: dharmesyā°
3
11
Q: om.; D: nāntitvam
4 A, E, H, I: nāstitvam copalabhyate; B, C, E G, J-N: co°; D: copala-
hate; em. by LVP (silently) 5 From this point on, the paper manu-
scripts consulted are limited to B, D, J, and L (see Manuscript De-
scription). 6 D: ci | rtta; L: vittam
7D: om. yan na labhyate
8 D: ta
9 D: naikatītam 10 B, J: nānāgate; L: nonāgate
1B:
svabhāvābhāvah; L: svabhābhāvah
12 L: ta
13 Tib: gang dag :
yah (the Sanskrit's singular form has been understood as having a
general sense) L: om. pratītyabhāvānām svabhāvam abhiniviśate
sa dharmesv idamsatyābhiniveśitayābhinivistah san karmāny api
karoti samsāre 'pi samsarati; PsP Tib: dngos po rnams rang bzhin yod
par rtogs nas mngon par zhen pa :: pratītyabhāvānām svabhāvam
abhiniviśate 15 5 D: abhiviśateh 16 D: dharmasv
14
1010
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
śitayābhiniviṣṭaḥ' san karmāṇyapi karoti| saṃsāre 'pi saṃsarati |
viparyāsāvasthitatvān na bhavya nirvāṇam adhigantum ||
3
5
7
bhavanti ||
213
6
877. kiṃ punar mṛṣāsvabhāvā api padārthāḥ saṅkeśavyavadānanibandhanaṃ
8
5 bhavanti
• tathā māyāvatas tatsvabhāvānabhijñānāṃ tathāgata - D7v
PsPL 46 nirmitaś copacitakuśalamūlānām ||
10
uktaṃ hi dṛḍhādhyāśayaparipṛcchāsūtre
9
tadyathā kulaputra māyākāranāṭake pratyupasthite māyākāranirmitāṃ
striyaṃ dṛṣṭvā kaścid rāgaparītacetāḥ" parṣacchāradyabhayenotthāyāsa-
12
13
14
15
nā apakramet | so 'pakramya tām" eva striyamaśubhato
17
18
16
manasikuryāt | anityato" duḥkhataḥ śūnyato 'nātmato mana-
B13v
1Q: °niveśatayā abhinivistah; B, J: idamsatyābhiniveśitamabhini-
vistah; D: idamsatyādiniveśitayāhinivistah; conj. by LVP: idamsa-
tyābhini[veśād abhini]vistah; em. by de Jong (1978: 33): °abhiniveśi-
tayā°; PsP Tib: 'di bden par mngon par zhen pa nyid kyi sgo nas
mngon par zhes par 'gyur 2 P: sat; B, J: sat 3 Q: °tvān tu; D:
viparam(?)āsāvastitatyān; L: °sthita=ān; PsP Tib: las kyang byed
cing ’khor ba na yang 'khor bar 'gyur la | phyin ci log la gnas pas
mya ngan las ’das pa thob pa'i skal ba can du yang mi 'gyur ro ||
4 B, D, J, L: bhavyā 5 L: asigantum
6 J: puna
7D, J: bhavati
8 B, D, J, L: om. bhavanti; PsP1: om. bhavanti; PsP Tib: 'gyur te
9 B, J, L: °yuvati
10 D: drdhāśaya°
11Q: °parita °
sthachāradyabhayenātthayāsanād; J: °bhayenātthāyāsanād
15 p: iva; L: e
16 D: °kuyad; PsP Tib: mi
17 D:
12 D: par-
D, J,
13
14 p: om.
L: aya°
sdug pa dang | mi gtsang ba dang : aśubhato manasikuryat
itityuto 18 P: Ø; B, D: °tā; J: 'nānmatā214
sikuryāt||
iti vistaraḥ ||
vinaye ca'
yantrakārakāritā yantrayuvatiḥ sadbhuta
sadbhūtayuvatiśūnyā
6
sadbhutayuvatirūpeṇa pratibhāsate tasya ca citrakarasya kāmarāgā-
8
spadībhūtā ||
12
bhavanti ||
CRITICAL EDITION
J16r §78. tathāryaratnakūṭasūtre
13
5
.
9
10
11
tathā mṛṣāsvabhāvā api bhāvā bālānāṃ saṅkeśanibandhanaṃ "
2
3
-
5
15
atha khalu tāni” pañcamātrāṇi bhikṣuśatāni " bhagavato dharmadeśa-
nāmanavataranty anavagāhamānāny anadhimucyamānāni '
16
17
10
5 D:
1 L: va
2 Q: yantrasutih 3 B: °yuvatihśūnyā 4 B, J, L: 'sad°;
PsP Tib: n.e. sadbhūtayuvatirūpeṇa pratibhāsate | tasya ca
6 L: va
pranibhāsate
8
7 PsP: citrakārasya Em. following
LVP: °rāgāspadībhūtā. P, Q: °rāgāspadabhūtā; B, J, L: °rāgāspada-
bhūtā; D: kāyarāgāspadabhūtā 9 Tib: dpe de bzhin du : tathā
10 B, J, L: bhāvo 11 Em.: sankleśanibandhanam. P, Q: samkleśa-
vyavadānanibandhanam; B, D, J, L: samkleśavyavadānanibandhanam;
PsP1: samkleśavyavadānanibandhanam; Tib: kun nas nyon mongs
pa'i rgyu. See Translation note.
12 P: om.
13 PsP Tib: de bzhin
du ’phags pa dkon mchog brtsegs pa las kyang
15 p: Ø; D: bhiksugatāni 16 P: 0; B: anavagāhāt(?)ānāpy; J, L: ana-
vagāhatānāpy 17 B, J: anadhimucyamāni; D: enadhimudhyamānāni;
L: anadhimucyamāni mucyamāni
14 PsP Tib n.e. tāni
PsPL 475
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
215
2
3
4
utthāyāsanebhyaḥ' prakrāntāni | artha bhagavān yena mārgeṇa te
8
9
bhikṣava॰ gacchanti sma tasmin mārge bhikṣū nirmimīte sma |
12
atha tāni pañca bhikṣuśatāni" yena" tau dvau bhikṣū” tenopasaṅkā-
16
manti॰ sma| upasaṅkramya tāv" avocan" kutrāyuṣmantau gami- L13r
18
19
20
ṣyathaḥ | nirmitakāv” avocatāṃ gamiṣyāva āvām
17
1 D: utthāyāsunebhyah ± Q: atha khalu; PsPL 338.5: atha (om. kha-
lu); KPed Skt §141.3: atha khalu 3 PsP1: bhagavān [tasyām velā-
yām]. bhagavāms tasyām velāyām appears in the, according to Kragh
(2003: 93, n. 3), interpolated chapter 17 citation (PsP1 336.3ff.) and in
KPed
Skt (it does not occur in the corresponding PsP Tib for the PsP
chapter 1 passage which is, however, based on KP Tib and not on PsP
Skt). Candrakīrti's KP ms may not have contained it, or he may have
slightly abbreviated the passage. One could, on the other hand, con-
jecture that tasyām velāyām was dropped due to an eyeskip from °ām
of bhagavāms to °ām of velāyām. D: ta; J: om. te; PsPL: ete (mār-
genaite) 5 D: bhiksuvo
P: rgge
7 D: dvo 8 B, J, L: bhiksu
9 D: nimi°; N: nirmmite 10 P: ⊗; D: °tani 11 P: Ø; L: yana; LVP
6
conjectures a following mārgena on the basis of PsP Tib's lam and
also mārgena in the later occurrence of the KP citation (cf. PsPL
338.7); KPed §141.6: mārgena. The word is not necessary. 12 B, J, L:
bhiksu. LVP (PsPL 47, n. 3) adds a following nirmitakau in square
brackets on the basis of PsP1 338.7. He remarks that PsP Tib also
supports the emendation but it is without an equivalent for nirmita-
kau. KPed Skt: nirmito; KPed Tib: sprul pa'i. Ms P for the citation in
PsP chapter 17 attests nirmitakau. A dropping of nirmitakau from the
above passage is difficult to explain on paleographical grounds, and
the sentence makes sense without it. 13 B: °mati
14 KPed
Skt:
15 p: Ø; J: avocat 16 P: Ø; B: °manto; D: °mand(?)o
evam
17 L: °kāc. KPed Skt: tāv; KPed Tib: de gnyis kyis. PsP Tib: sprul pa
gnyis kyis
18 L: avovatām 19 J, L: °yāca 20 B, J, L: ārāmP8v
B14r
216
CRITICAL EDITION
2
4
araṇyāyataneṣu' | tatra dhyānasukhasparśavihārair vihariṣyāvaḥ| yaṃ
5
7
hi bhagavān dharmaṃ deśayati tamāvāṃ nāvatarāva nāvagāhāvahe
10
12
11
3
8
9
nādhimucyāvaha uttasyāvaḥ santrasyāvaḥ santrāsam āpadyā-
13
14
15
16
17
vahe | atha tāni pañca bhikṣuśatānyetad avocan vayamapy
atha"tānipañca॰
20
āyuṣmantau" bhagavato dharmadeśanāṃ" nāvatarāmo nāvagāhāmahe 5
nādhimucyāmaha utttrasyāmaḥ santrasyāmaḥ " santrāsam” āpadyamā-
21
7 D: re-
1 L: aranyāya° 2 KPed Skt: om. tatra 3 P: dhyānasakha° (final r
attested); J: °rai; L: dhyānamukhasparśaviharai. KPed Skt: sukham
phāsam (viharisyāmah); KPea Tib: bsam gtan gyi bde ba la reg par
gnas par bya bar ('dong ). PsP Tib as KPed Tib
4 L: ya. KPed Skt:
(preceding) tat kasmād dhetor; KPed Tib: de ci’i phyir zhe na. PsP Tib
as KPed Tib 5 D: bhamavān. LVP (PsPL 599) emends to bhagavan;
the nominative form is, however, correct. 6 L: dharma
peats from [dvau bhi]ksū tenopasamkrāmanti sma to yam hi bhagavān
dharmam deśayati KPed Tib attests chos bstan pa; PsP Tib as KPed
Tib 8 D: nāvaterāvo; J: °ve(?); L: nāvatarāvova. KPed Skt: dharma-
deśanām nāvarāvo; KPea Tib: chos bstan pa de la mi 'jug ste; PsP Tib
as KPed Tib 9 B, J, L: nāvagāhavahe; D nācagāhavahe
10 D: °hai
11 D: tatrasyāveh 12 B, J, L: om.; PsP1: om. santrasyāvah; KPed Skt:
samtrasāvah; KPed Tib: kun tu dngangs; PsP Tib as KPed Tib
13 KPed Skt: āpadyāvahe | tāv āvām āranyāyatanesu sukham vihari-
syāmah; KPea Tib: kho ba cag dgon pa'i gnas rnams su bsam gtan gyi
bde ba la reg par gnas pa rnams kyis gnas par bya'o; PsP Tib as KPe ed
Tib KPed Skt: om. atha
15 KPed Skt: tāni apy
L: paca
17 P: Ø; J: avocad 18 P: Ø; D: °manto; PsP1: °manto; PsP Tib: tshe
dang ldan pa dag |; KPea Skt: ayusmamto (also used for vocative dual,
cp. KPed § 141.7 [VD 2002: 49]: kutra āyusmamto gamisyathah); KPed
Tib: tshe dang Idan pa dag (kho bo cag kyang bcom Idan 'das kyis
chos bshad pa la mi ’jug) 19 P: °nāmn; D: °nā
20 D: nāvatarāho;
22 J, L: samtrāśam
16
14
21 J: om.
L: nāmvatarāmāPsPL 48
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
3
he| tena vayam araṇyāyataneṣu dhyānasukhasparśavihārair vihari -
8
23
.
6
ṣyāmaḥ'| nirmitakāv avocatāṃ tena hy āyuṣmantaḥ saṅgā-
9
12
syāmo nauṃ vivadiṣyāmaḥ”| avivādaparamo " hi śramaṇadharmaḥ |
na
14
15
kasyāyuṣmantaḥ prahāṇāya pratipannāḥ | tāny avocana rāga-
dveṣamohānāṃ" prahāṇāya vayaṃ pratipannāḥ | nirmitakāv avocatāṃ” J16v
kiṃ punarāyuṣmatāṃ saṃvidyante rāgadveṣamohā yān kṣapayiṣyatha |
18
19
20
21
22
tāny avocan" na te 'dhyātma ” na bahirdhā nobhayamantareṇopa-
labhyantai nāpi te 'parikalpitā utpadyante| nirmitakāv
13
217
2
5
2
10P:
12
1 D: tene. KPed Skt: te; KPea Tib: de’i phyir; PsP Tib as KPea Tib
Q: āranyā° 3 KPed Skt: dhyānasukhavihārair; KPed Tib: bsam
gtan gyi bde ba la reg par gnas pa rnams kyis. PsP Tib as KPea Tib
L: vi | harisyāmah
5 D: °kām 6 L: acocatām
7 B, J, L: tenā;
D: tanā; KPed Skt: om. tena hi. KPed Tib: de’i phyir; PsP Tib as KPed
Tib. The word order of KPea Skt differs: nirmitakāv avocatā samga-
yisyāma vayam āyusmamto 8 P: ayusya(n)tah
9 B: om.
vivādisyāmah; B, J, L: vivādisyamah 11 Q: avivādādaparamo;
PsPL: °paramā P: ¬; B, J, L: Śravaņadharmah; D: śuvaņadhar-
mah; PsP1: Śramanasya dharmāh; PsP Tib: dge sbyong gi chos; KPed
Skt: Śramanadharmah; cf. PTSD samanadhammam
syāyuṣmaḥ. This sentence and the next are not attested in KPed
KPed Tib. See Translation note.
[1]+(ocan); Q: avocana; D: avācan
D: acocatām. KPea Skt: prāhuh
ksayisyathah; B: °thas; J, L: °thah;
20 KPed Skt: te. PsP chapter 17 citation: te
āhu
13 P: Ø; J: ka-
Skt or
15
5 P:
14 P: (t).[1]; D: māny
19 P:
17
16 J: rāgādve (?)samohānā
18 L: rāgadvegamohā
KPea Skt : ksapayisyatha
21 D: avocana. KPed Skt:
23 D, L: °pala-
22 Q: ādhyatmyan; KPed Skt: ādhyātmena
tyante218
CRITICAL EDITION
2
3
4
5
avocatāṃ' tena hy āyuṣmanto mā kalpayata mā vikalpayata |
6
8
yadā cāyuṣmanto॰ na kalpayiṣyatha na vikalpayiṣya tadā na
9
14
raṅkhyathaṃ na viraṅkhyatha| yaś" ca" na rakto" na viraktaḥ sa śānta
ityucyate | śīlamāyuṣmanto na saṃsarati na parinirvāti|
samādhiḥ" prajñā vimuktir vimuktijñānadarśanam" āyuṣmanto na 5
saṃsarati na parinirvāti| ebhiś cāyuṣmanto dharmair” nirvāṇaṃ
17
16
1 L: acovatām 2 KPed Skt: om. hi
3 P: ayusyant(0); J, L: °tau
4
Skt: māsmān
5 P: [4]yata; B, J, L: om.; conj. by LVP: [mā
KPed
vikalpayata]; PsP Tib: rnam par ma rtog cig; KPed Skt: māsman (read:
māsmān; cf. VD 2002: 51, n. 345) vikalpayata; KPed Tib: rnam par
ma rtog cig 6 KPed Skt: om. ca 7 D: vikalpamisyatha 8 D: tedā.
9
KPed Skt: tadā āyusmamto
B: rakşatha; J: ksyatha; L: rajyatha
10 P: viramksyatham na rakto na viraktah yaś ca, that is, yaś ca ap-
pears only after viraktaḥ; B, J: virakṣatha; L: virakṣathaḥ; KPed Skt:
viramksyathah yaś cāyusmamto na rakto na viraktah ( KPed §143.11 )
11 D: paś
12 KPed Skt: cāyusmamto 13 Q: arakto (cārakto : ca na
rakto); B, L: racakto; J: ca(?)kto 14 B: viracaktah; J, L: vicaktah
15 P: samādhiprajñāvimuktivimuktijñānadarśanam : samādhih prajñā
vimuktir vimuktijñānadarśanam; KPed Skt, VD (2002: 51): as P. I am
not familiar with the samahāra compound attested by both P and the
KPed
Skt ms being used in other works and thus accept Q's reading.
De Jong (1978: 223), basing his emendation on ms D's reading sa-
mādhih prajñāvimuktivimuktijñānadarśanam for the citation as found
in PsPL chapter 17 and KPea §144, corrects the chapter 17 text to read
samādhiprajñā°. The compound śīlasamādhiprajñāvimuktivimukti-
jñānadarśanaskandhān occurs a number of times in the Asta but P’s
and the KPed Skt ms's samahāra compound does not. 16 Q: °darśa-
nam eva 17 B, D, J, L: dharma5
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
219
2
3
sūcyate'' ete ca dharmāḥ' śūnyāḥ prakṛtiviviktāḥ | prajahītai-
.5
tāmāyuṣmantaḥ sañjñāṃ' yaduta parinirvāṇamiti| mā ca sañjñāyāṃ L13v
6
8
10
11
sañjñāṃ kā mā ca sañjñā sañjñāṃ parijñāsiṣṭa | yo hi "
12
13
15
16
sañjña sañjña parijānāti sañjñābandhanam evāsya tad
bhavati| sañjñāvedayitanirodhasamāpattim" āyuṣmantaḥ samāpadya - Dar
18
19
dhvam|
sañjñāvedayitanirodhasamāpattisamāpannasya bhikṣor
14
1 P, Q: Śu°
2 P: dharmā 3 PsPL: °viviktā. KPed Skt: viviktā agrā
...; VD 2002: 51: vivektā agrrā(hyāh); KPea Tib: dben pa gzung du
med pa; PsP Tib as KPed Tib; ms P for the chapter 17 citation: viviktā
agrāhyā niścestah 4 B, D, J: samjñā; L: samjñāḥ
5 Em.: sañjñā-
yām. P, Q: samjñāyāh; B, D, J, L: samjñāyāh. Ms P for the chapter 17
citation: samjñāyām; KPed Skt: mā ca samjñāyā samjñā kārsvah
(emend to kārsta; cf. VD 2002: 51, n. 348) mā asamjñāyā; KPed Tib:
'du shes la yang 'du shes su ma byed cig 6 P: samjñā; B, D, J, L:
samjña 7 B, D, J, L: kāsti 8 Em.: sañjñayā. P, Q: samjñāyāḥ; B, J,
L: samjñāyāh; D: sajñāmyāca; PsP1: samjñāyām; PsP Tib: 'du shes
kyis; ms P for the chapter 17 citation: samjñāyā; KPed Skt: samjñayā;
KP Tib: 'du shes kyis 9 P, Q: samjñā; D: samjñāyā
10 B, J: °tah;
D: parijñāmista 11 KPed Skt: om. hi 12 Em.: sañjñayā. P, Q: sam-
14 P:
15
18 D:
jñāyāh; B, D, J: samjñāyāh; L: om.; PsPL: samjñāyām; ms P for the
chapter 17 citation : samjñayā; PsP Tib: 'du shes kyis; KPea Skt: sam-
13
Tib: 'du shes kyis
jñayā; KPed
Q: samjñā; D, J, L: samjñā
parijānāti samjñāti; ms P for the chapter 17 citation: om. samjñāti;
KPed
Skt: om. samjñati L: sajñāmebandhanam; PsP Tib: de'i de
ni ’du shes la yongs su bcings pa yin; KPed Tib: de ni de'i 'du shes
kyis beings pa yin
D: evāmya
17 D: °vedayiteniro
samjñāvadayitānanodha°; KPed Skt: mā ca kalpayatha mā vikalpaya-
thah samjñāvedayita[niro]dha° (cf. VD 2002: 51); KPed Tib: n.e. ma
ca kalpayatha mā vikalpayathah; PsP chapter 17 citation: n.e. mā ca
kalpayatha mā vikalpayathah 19 D: bhaksā; L: bhikso
16B14v
Q8a
J17r
220
CRITICAL EDITION
2
nāsty uttarikaraṇīyam iti vadāvaḥ ||
5
3
.4
atha teṣāṃ pañcānāṃ bhikṣuśatānām anupādāyāśravebhyaś
14
7
8
10
cittāni vimuktānyabhūvan | tāni vimuktacittāni yena
12
13
bhagavāṃs" tenopasaṅkrāntān upasankramya bhagavataḥ pādau
abhivandyaikānte nyaṣīdan | athāyuṣmān su- PsPL 49
16
17
śirobhira
18
19
20
bhūtis tān bhikṣūn etad avocat kutrāyuṣmanto" gatāḥ
kuto vāgatāḥ| te” 'vocan” na kvacid" gamanāya” na kutaści-
dāgamanāya bhadanta” subhūte bhagavatā dharmo deśitaḥ| āha ko
26
27
28
29
15
9
6
21
1 B, J, L: nīsty; D: nāmsty 2 B, J, L: uttarī°; PsPr: uttarī°; de Jong
(1978: 33) refers to BHSD s.v. uttari. KPed Skt: uttare karanīyam
3 KPed
Skt (instead of atha): asmim khalu punar dharmaparyāye bha-
syamāne, which appears in ms P's PsP chapter 17 citation as: asmin
khalv api dharmaparyāye nirmittakabhiksubhyām bhāsyamānam
4 Q: Ø; D: yamjana 5 Q: ///nām 6 B, J, L: anupādayāśriyebhyaś;
KPed Skt: te
8
7
D: anupādāyāsreyetyas KPed Skt: om. abhūvan
9 D: vimuktavittani
10 L: yana
11 L: bhavāms
12 B: °samkrāti;
J: °samkrānti; L: °samkrāmti
13 J: upasakramya
14 B, D, J, L:
śirasā (conjoined with following word); PsPŁ: śirasā (conjoined with
following word); KPed Skt: Śirobhir; P and D for the PsP chapter 17
citation (cf. de Jong 1978: 223): śirobhir 15 D: abhivantyaikānte; J:
abhivadyaikānte. KPed Skt: vyanditva ekamte 16 P: nyaśīdan; D:
nyasīdanā; J, L: nyasīdan; PsPL: nyasīdan
17 J: °māt P: tāna
19 D: bhikūn
20
20 P: evāvocat; D: avocana; ms P for the chapter 17
citation: om. eva; KPed Skt: om. eva 21 P: kutāyu°. KPed Skt: kva
nu khalv āyusmamto
23 J: om.
24 KPed
Skt: akvacid ::
26
na kvacid 25
D: gamanoya
B, L: bhagavanta; J: bhagavantah
28 KPed Skt: subhūtir āha; KPed Tib: n.e. subhutir
18
22 J: om.
28
27 D: dharmā
29D: kā5
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
3
nāmāyuṣmata' śāstā | āhur yatpanna na parinirvāsyati|
6
5
7
8
āha kathaṃ yuṣmābhir dharmaḥ śrutaḥ | āhur na bandhāya na
11
221
9
10
12
mokṣāya | āha kena yūyaṃ vinītāḥ | āhur yasya na kāyo na
16
13
14
15
cittam| āha॰ kathaṃ yūyaṃ prayuktāḥ | āhur nāvidyāprahāṇāya
17
18
19
na vidyotpādanāya " | āha kasya yūyaṃ śrāvakāḥ | āhur yena
20
21
22
na prāptaṃ nābhisambuddham | āha " ke " yuṣmākaṃ sabrahmacāriṇaḥ”| P9r
2
2 KPed Skt: te āhuh
5
3
L: co 4 D: nonpanno. KPed
Skt: subhutir āha; subhūtir n.e.
6 D:
in KPed Tib. KPed Skt also attests preceding questions and answers
not attested here in PsP or in KPed Tib; see KPed §146.1-3 Skt
yusmabhi. KPed Skt: punar yusme; KPed Tib: n.e. punar 7KPed Skt:
te āhur; KPed Tib: n.e. te 8 B, J, L: badhyāya; D: banthāya; PsPL:
bandhanāya; KPed Skt: bandhanāya; ms P for chapter 17 citation: ban-
dhāya 9 KP Skted: (preceding) subhūtir āha | katham yūyam pra-
[yu]ktā (cf. VD 2002: 52) te āhu | na yogāya na prayogāya | na prahā-
nāya | subhūtir; KPed Tib n.e. subhūtir, etc. 10 D: vinītā
11 D: āha
12
14
13
15
2 D: kāyo na kāmo. KPed Skt (for the entire sentence): yasya na kāya-
pārinispattir na cittapracāram; KPed Tib: su la lus med cing sems med
KPed
pas
Skt: subhūtir āha; KPēd Tib: n.e. subhūtir KPed Skt
(for the sentence): katham yusmābhi prayujyamānā vimuktāh; KPed
Tib: khyed ji ltar brtson D: āha 16 B, J, L: °prahānāya; D: no-
vidyā° Q: vidyotpadāya; D: °nayā 8 B: om. KPed Skt: subhu-
tir āha; KPea Tib: n.e. subhūtir D: āha. KPed Skt: te āhuh; KPed
Tib: n.e. te 20 D: nāhiº. KPed Skt ( for the sentence): yasya na prāpto
nā[bhi]sambuddhah (cf. VD 2002:52)
KPed
Skt: subhūtir āha;
18
17
19
21
KPea Tib: n.e. subhūtir 22 KPed Skt: keva; VD 2002: 52: ke (')va
23 D: sambramācārinah
1 D: nyamā°
Skt: yotpanno : yo notpanno
KPedL14r
222
CRITICAL EDITION
3
4
āhur' ye traidhātuke nopavicaranti | āha kiyaccireṇāyuṣmantaḥ
parinirvāsyanti| ārya tathāgatanirmitakāḥ' parini-
7
8
5
10
11
rvāsyanti| āha kṛtaṃ yuṣmābhiḥ karaṇīyam | āhur" ahaṅkāra-
mamakāraparijñānataḥ | āha kṣīṇā yuṣmākaṃ kleśāḥ | āhur
13
12
13
14
D: aha. KPed Skt: te āhuḥ; KPed Tib: n.e. te 2 B, L: yai; D: mai; J:
yaim 3 Q: nopavicarati; D: nopaviceranti; L: nopavivaranti; J: no-
pevicaranti. KPed Skt continues with na pracaram(ti), which is not
reflected in KPed Tib. PsP Skt attests its equivalent for the sentences
given at KPed §147.2-6 (keva cireṇa ...) only after the sentence āhur
ye traidhātuke nopavicaranti (this sentence occurs in KPed Skt at
§147.7). These sentences in the KP citation in PsP chapter 17 follow
the order of those here in chapter 1. The order of the sentences in
Tib concords with that of PsP Skt. PsP Tib agrees with KPed Tib.
KPed
Skt: subhūtir āha; KPed Tib: n.e. subhūtir 5 L: kiyacireṇāyu-
D: parinivasyanti. KPed Skt (for the sentence): keva cireṇa
KPed
4
smatah
8
yūyam parinirvāsyathaḥ 7 D: aha. KPed Skt: te āhuḥ; KPed Tib: n.e.
te KPed Skt for the sentence: yāvaccireṇa tathāgatanirmi[ta]kāḥ
parinirvāsyamtāḥ tāvaccireṇa vayam parinirvāsyāmaḥ ⁹ Q: ºni-
mmitakāḥ; J: tathāgataḥnirmitakaḥ; L: ºnimitikāḥ; PsP₁: nirmitāḥ;
ms P for the chapter 17 citation: tathāgatanirmitāḥ; ms P likewise
attests ᵒnirmitāḥ in the sentence yangāminas tathāgatanirmitāḥ both
here (toward end of citation) and in the chapter 17 citation. KPed Skt:
nirmi[ta]kāḥ (cf. VD 2002: 52)
10 KPed
Skt: subhūtir āha; KPed
Tib: n.e. subhūtir. In KPed Skt, this sentence is preceded by: subhūtir
āha | kṛtam yuṣmābhi svakārtha te āhuḥ arthānupalabdhatvāt. These
sentences do not appear in KPed Tib. 11 D: āha; J: om. KPed Skt: te
āhuḥ; KPed Tib: n.e. te
KPed
Skt: kārakānupa[la]bdhitvāt (cf. VD
2002: 52). KPed Tib: ngar ’dzin pa dang | nga yir 'dzin pa yongs su
shes pas so (= PsP Skt and Tib)
KPed
Skt: subhūtir āha; KPed Tib:
n.e. subhūtir 14 D: āha; J, L: āhur. KPed Skt: te āhuḥ; KPed Tib: n.e.
12
13
te5
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
atyantakṣayāt' sarvadharmāṇām | āha dharṣito yuṣmābhir māraḥ|
3
5
6
4
āhuḥ skandhamārānupalambhāt | āha paricarito yuṣmābhiḥ
7
8
9 10
11
12
śāstā | āhur na kāyena na vācā na manasā | āha
13
15
āhur agrāhato
19
saṃsāraḥ | āhur" B15r
21
anucchedato” 'śāśvatataḥ| āha " pratipannā yuṣmābhir dakṣi-
14
viśodhitā yuṣmābhir dakṣiṇīyabhūmiḥ |
223
16
'pratigrāhataḥ| āha° uttīrṇo" yuṣmābhiḥ
18
22
23
24
ṇīyabhūmiḥ ”| āhuḥ ” sarvagrāhavimuktitaḥ | āha” kiṅgāmina
1 D: ratyanyajamāt; L: abhyantakṣayāt 2 KPed Skt: subhutir aha;
KPed Tib: n.e. subhutir 3 D: āha. KPed Skt: te āhuh; KPed Tib: n.e. te
4 KPed
5
Skt: subhutir āha; KPed Tib: n.e. subhutir 5 B, D, J, L: °tā
6 D: °bhi 7 D: om. KPed Skt: tathāgatah; KPed
Tib: ston pa
8 D:
KPed
Skt: om. na vācā
9
10
12 KPea Skt: subhūtir āha; KPed
13
14
17 KPed Skt:
āha. KPed Skt: te āhuh; KPea Tib: n.e. te
Q: om. 11 KPed Skt: cittena
Tib: n.e. subhutir D: vośisitā. KPed Skt: sthitā; KPed Tib: sbyangs
Q: daksinīyā°; B, J, L: daksiniya°; D: dantaksanīya°; KPed Skt:
dāksineyabhūmauh; as reflected in VD (2002: 52), the two dots inter-
preted in KPed Skt as a visarga actually function as a punctuation
marker.
15 D: āha. KPed Skt: te āhuh; KPed Tib: n.e. te
16 J: om.;
L: āhu. KPed Skt: subhutir āha; KPea Tib: n.e. subhutir
chinnā; KPed Tib: brgal
18
19
D: yusmābhiva ⁹ D: āha. KPed Skt: te
āhuh; KPea Tib: n.e. te 20 D: anucchamdato. KPed Skt (for the sen-
tence): anuccheda aśāśvatatvāt 21 KPed Skt: subhūtir āha; KPea Tib:
n.e. subhūtir 22 Em. following LVP: daksinīya°; P, Q: daksinīyā°;
D: daksinīyā°; B, J, L: daksiniya°; KPed Skt: Śramanaśramanabhūmau
(VD: sets the first śramaņa in curly brackets; it is not marked as de-
leted in the KP ms) for daksinīyabhūmih; KPed Tib: sbyin pa'i gnas
kyi sar 23 D: āha. KPed Skt: tena punar āhuh; KPed Tib: n.e. te pu-
24 B, D, J: °vinirmuktitah; L: sarvagrāsavinirmuktitah; PsPL:
°vinirmuktitah. KPed Skt: asamgāvimuktau; KPed Tib: 'dzin pa thams
cad las rnam par grol ba'i phyir. Ms P for the chapter 17 citation:
nar
J17v224
CRITICAL EDITION
1
2
āyuṣmantaḥ | āhur yaṅgāminas tathāgatanirmitā iti hyā-
3
4
5
6
yuṣmataḥ subhūteḥ paripṛcchatas teṣāṃ ca bhikṣūṇāṃ visarjayata PsP_50
9
tasyāṃ parṣadyaṣṭānāṃ bhikṣuśatānām anupādāyāśravebhyaś cittāni
10
vimuktāni dvātriṃśataś ca prāṇisahasrāṇāṃ virajo vigatamalaṃ "
dharmeṣu dharmacakṣur viśuddham ||
12
13
iti ||
8
evaṃ mṛṣāsvabhāvābhyāṃ tathāgatanirmitābhyāṃ bhikṣubhyāṃ" pañcānāṃ
bhikṣuśatānāṃ vyavadānanibandhanaṃ kṛtamiti||
§79. uktaṃ cāryavajramaṇḍāyāṃ dhāraṇyām'
16
17
14
°vimuktitah 25 KPed Skt: subhūtir [āha] (see VD 2002: 53); KPed
Tib: n.e. subhūtir
1 D: āha; J: om.; KP Sktea: te āhuh; KPea Tib: n.e. te
2 D: °tā; L: ta-
thāganirmitāh 3 D: subhūtah 4 Q: pañca; B, J, L: om.; PsPL: om.
6 J: viśarja-
5
ca. VD (2002:53): (ca) Q: bhikşuśatānām; J: °na
yatām
7 D: tasmā 8 D: °śetānām. KPed Skt: bhikṣuśatānām pam-
cānām ca bhikṣunīśatānām; KPed Tib: n.e. pamcānām ca bhikṣunīśatā-
nām
9 D: anuyādā°
10 P: prānasahasrāhnām. KPed Skt: prānisa-
hasrānām sadevamānusikāyām prajāyām; KPed Tib: n.e. sadevamānu-
sikāyām prajāyām 11 P: °mala(m); D: °mala 12 P: °su; B, J, L:
°su; PsP1: °suh
15
13 LVP adds a preceding iti (viśuddham | iti || ity
evam), which is not found in any of the mss 14Q: bhiksubhyam
tathāgatanirmitābhyām (see next note); L: °nirmityam Q: om.;
D: bhiksutyām 16 B: cāyamvajra°; D: vāryavajra°; J: cāyasaja-
mandāyām; L: cāyavajamandāyām
17 PsP Tib adds a following
kyang.
55
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
3
1 2
tadyathā mañjuśrīḥ kāṇḍaṃ ca pratītya mathanīṃ ca pratītya puruṣasya ca
hastavyāyāmaṃ pratītya dhūmaḥ prādurbhavaty agnir abhinirvartate
225
5
13
6
1
7 8
sa cāgnisantāna kāṇḍasanniti na mathanīsanniśrito" na
12
puruṣasya" hastavyāyāmasanniśritaḥ | evameva mañjuśrīr asadvi-
paryāsamohitasya puruṣapudgalasyotpadyate " rāgaparidāho dveṣa-
14
1
6
J: puruṣa
2 P: om. ca; B, D, J, L: om. ca; conj. by LVP: hastavyā-
yāmam [ca] ³ D: °vyāyāsam; PsP Tib: gtsub shing dang gtsub stan
la brten | mi’i lag pa'i rtsol ba la brten nas du ba 'byung; VMD Tib P:
gtsub shing dang gtsub stan la yang brten | mi'i lag pas gtsub la yang
brten nas 4 D: stamah 5 D, J, L: prādurbhavatīti Q: abhipra-
vartate; B, J, L: abhinivarttate; D: ebhiº; PsP Tib, VMD Tib P,
Gondhla, sTog, Phug brag 1: mngon par 'grub; VMD Tib Phug brag
2: 'byung bar 'gyur 7 P: cāgnisantātpor; Q: cāgnisampāto; D: cā-
gnisamtopo; PSP Tib, VMD Tib P, Gondhla, sTog, Phug brag 1 & 2:
n.e. santāpaḥ
8 D: va
9 Em. following LVP: °sanniśrito; P, Q:
ºsanniḥśrito; B, D, J, L: °samniḥśrito 10 Em. following LVP: ma-
thanīsanniśrito; P: araṇisanniśrito; Q: °samnihśrito; B, J, L: °san-
niḥsṛto; D: °samnihśrito. 11 P, B, D, J, L: conjoined with following
compound (puruṣahastaº); PsP₁: puruṣahasta 12 Q: °sanniḥśritaḥ;
D: sannihśritah; J: °vyāyāmamsannihśritaḥ
13 Q: ºviparyāsa-
sammohitasya; D: asadviyaryāsamāhitasya; PsP Tib: n.e. viparyāsa:
med pa las skyes bu gang zag rmongs pa la; VMD Tib P, Gondhla,
sTog, Phug brag 1 & 2: n.e. viparyāsa. VMD Tib, however, construes
asat with paridāha: skye bu¹ gang zag rmongs pa la 'dod chags dang
zhe sdang dang | gti mug gyis yong su gdung ba² meď³ paª 'byung5
ste; ¹ VMD Tib Gondhla: om. skye bu; ² sTog: ba'i; ³sTog: me; 4Phug
brag 1: bar; 5Gondhla: om. 'byung; VMD Tib Phug brag 2: rmongs
pa’i skye bu dag la | 'dod chags dang gti mug gyis yong su gdung ba
med bzhin tu byung ste | 14 B, J: °pumgalasyotpadyante; D: °pud-
galasyātpadyate; L: as B, ºpungalaºJ18r
L14v
D8v
B15v
226
CRITICAL EDITION
1
2
paridāho mohaparidāhaḥ | sa ca paridāho nādhyātmaṃ na bahirdhā
3
4
5
6
nobhayam antareṇa sthitaḥauṃ | api tu mañjuśrīr' yad' ucyate moha
7
9
iti tat kena kāraṇenocyate moha iti | atyantamukto hi
12
mañjuśrīḥ sarvadharmair" mohas tenocyate " moha iti| tathā
13
14
15
narakamukhā mañjuśrīḥ sarvadharmā idaṃ dhāraṇīpadam| āha kathaṃ 5
16
17
18
19
20
bhagavann idaṃ॰ dhāraṇīpadam | āha narakā" mañjuśrīr bāla-
pṛthagjanair asadviparyāsaviṭhapitāḥ svavikalpasambhūtāḥ | PsP,51
āha kutra bhagavan narakāḥ samavasaranti | bhagavānāha ākāśa-
samavasaraṇā ” mañjuśrīr narakāḥ | tat kiṃ manyase mañjuśrīḥ
21
22
23
1D: °dāhā 2P: nādhyātma; Q: nādhyātmyam 3 D: antarana
4
D: sthita. PsP Tib, VMD Tib P, Gondhla, sTog, Phug brag 1 : gnyi ga
med par yang mi gnas :: nobhayam antarena sthitah (antarena is
intended in its BHS sense of “between”); VMD Tib Phug brag 2:
gnyis ka’i bar na gnas pa ma yin 5 D: mamjuśrī; L: ºśrī
6psP
Tib, VMD Tib P, Gondhla, sTog,
Phug brag 2: gang
7 D: tata
12 P: Ø; L: tatho
10 P: Ø; L: sarvadharmer 11 P: Ø; D: tenocyade
15 L:
13 PsP Tib, VMD Tib P, Gondhla, sTog, Phug brag 1 & 2: chos thams
cad ni sems can dmyal ba'i sgo
14 L: sarvadharmer (then repeats)
mohas tenoccyate moha iti || tatho narakammukhā mamjuśrīr
om. idam dhāranīpadam | āha katham bhagavann idam dhāranīpadam
| āha narakā mañjuśrīr
16 J: ida
17 PsP Tib, VMD Tib P, Gondhla,
sTog, Phug brag 1 & 2 translate narakāh as sems can dmyal ba (dag )
throughout 18 D: bālavrtasagjanair; J: bālamrthagjanair; L: bola°
19 D: °vidyapitāh; J, L: vithavitāh 20D: svavilakalpa°
ākāśasamavasamavasaranā
22 p: Ø; L: manyasa 23 P: Ø; D: vi-
21 p: ⊗; L:
sarga formed like dr
Phug brag 1: n.e. yat; VMD Tib
8 D: karanenācyata
9 P: om.5
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
2
3
svavikalpasambhūtā narakā uta svabhāvasambhūtāḥ | āha svavi-
5
7
kalpenaiva bhagavan sarvabālapṛthagjanā' narakatiryagyoniyamalokaṃ
9
10
sañjānanti| te cāsatsamāropeṇa duḥkha vedanāṃ
12
13
duḥkham anubhavanti triṣvapy apāyeṣu ||
227
8
vedayanti
11
14
15
16
duḥkham |
yathā cāhaṃ" bhagavan narakān paśyāmi tathā nārakaṃ
tadyathā bhagavan" kaścideva puruṣaḥ suptaḥ svapnāntaragato naraka- Q8v
18
19
1
2: n.e. sarva
| P: [1](vi)ką[1](s)ambhūtā; B, D, J: °tāḥ; L: svavikalpamsambhūtāḥ
2 B, D, J, L: naraka
3 Q: u 4 D: svavikalpyanaiva 5 Q: bhavan
6 Q: om. sarva; PsP Tib, VMD Tib P, Gondhla, sTog, Phug brag 1 &
7Q: narakapretatiryagyoni°; D: °tiryaśyoni°; Q's
preta is not reflected in PsP Tib or VMD Tib (P, Gondhla, sTog, Phug
brag 1 & 2). The fact that *LT's author glosses yamaloka with pretāh
indicates that his PsP ms did not attest preta (cf. *LT 2004: 124, 141
[fol. 2b3]).
8 D: °ropeneh
10
P: duskham; L: duhkhā
D: ce-
danām
11 D: vadayamti
12 P: duskham 13 D: apāyesa
14Q:
nāham; D: vāhe; PsP Tib: ma khums; VMD Tib: mi/ma mthong.
Tibetan for the entire sentence: PsP Tib: bdag gis ni ji ltar sems can
dmyal ba ma khums pa de bzhin du sems can dmyal ba’i sdug bsngal
yang ma khums so ||; VMD Tib P Gondhla, sTog, Phug brag 1: bdag
gis sems can dmyal ba ji ltar mi mthong ba de bzhin du | sems can
dmyal ba rnams' mi mthong ste | sems can dmyal ba’i2 sdug bsngal3
yang ma mchis so ||; 'sTog: dmyal ba pa rnams; 2sTog: dmyal ba pa'i;
3Gondhla: sdug bsngal ba’i sdug bsngal; Phug brag 1 : sdug bsngal ba;
VMD Tib Phug brag 2 : ji ltar sems can dmyal ba ni bdag gis ma
mthong ngo || de bzhin du sems can dmyal ba pa yang ma mthong ste
|| sems can dmyal ba’i sdug bsngal yang ma mthong ngo ||. See Trans-
15 D: bhagavana; L: bhagava
16 P: Ø; D: mārakam;
lation note.
P9v
L: prārakam 17 P: Ø; D: bhagavanam 18 PsP Tib, VMD Tib: n.e.
19
eva
9 D: °taraśatoJ18v
228
CRITICAL EDITION
2
gatam' ātmānaṃ sañjānīte | sa tatra kvathitāyāṃ samprajvalitā-
5
3
4
yām anekapauruṣāyāṃ lohakumbhyāṃ prakṣiptamātmanaṃ sañjānīyāt |
11
6
8
9
10
12
sa tatra khaṭu tīvra duḥkha veda vedayet | sa tatra
13
14
15
16
17
mānasaṃ paridāhaṃ sañjānīyāda uttaset santraset santrāsam
1 P: nara(k).[2](m); D: narakaśatam 2 Q: samjānīyet
ally read te but e has been erased and a virāma added)
4
Q: prajvalitāyām 5 D: anaka°; PsP Tib: skyes bu du ma dang ldan
6 L: lo-
8 P: om. sa
11 D:
10 D: kadukām
pa; VMD Tib P, Gondhla, sTog, Phug brag 1: 'dom du ma mchis pa;
VMD Tib Phug brag 2: mi du mas. See Translation note.
khakumtyām 7 P: 0; D: samjī(?)nīyāt; L: samjīyāt
tatra kharām kaṭukām
9 L: khanām
tīkam; PsP Tib: drag cing mi bzad la brnag par dka' zhing yid du mi
’ong ba · kharām kaṭukām tīvrām; VMD Tib P, Gondhla, sTog, Phug
brag 1: sdug bsngal gyi tshor ba myong bar rab tu ’tshal te · kharām
kaṭukām tīvrām duḥkham vedanām vedayet; VMD Tib Phug brag 2:
sdug bsngal gyi tshor ba myong nas
12 D: duḥkhā
13 L: mānam-
pasam
15 P: uttrasana
14 PsP Tib: myong bar ’gyur : sañjānīyāt
16 P: santrasa(n)ą; B, D, J, L: om.; PsP Tib: skrag par 'gyur | dngangs
par 'gyur (*santraset) | kun tu dngangs par 'gyur · uttraset santraset
santrāsam āpadyeta; VMD Tib P, Gondhla, sTog, Phug brag 1: 'jigs
(Gondhla:) skrag ste sngangs · uttraset santraset santrāsam āpadye-
ta; VMD Tib Phug brag 2: sngangs kun tu sngangs | kun tu rab tu
sngangs par gyur · uttraset santraset santrāsam āpadyeta. Cp., e.g.,
Aṣṭa 3.12: ... nottrasyati na samtrasyati na samtrāsam āpadyate. PsP
Tib (unlike VMD Tib) sets the verbs describing the man's fear in a
separate sentence (the new sentence begins after myong bar 'gyur)
which commences with de de na (*sa tatra).
17 P: Ø; D: samtrā; L:
satrāsas
t origin-
3 B: kaᵒ5
PsPL 52
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
229
2
1
3
4
āpadyeta'| sa tatra prativibuddhaḥ samā'ho duḥkham aho
5
6
7
8
duḥkhamiti krandec chocet parivet | atha tasya mitrajñāti-
10
11
12
sālohitāḥ' paripṛccheyuḥ kenaitat " tava duḥkhamiti | sa tān
14
15
16
13
mitrajñātisālohitān evaṃ vade nairayikaṃ duḥkham anu-
17
18 19
bhūtam | sa tān ākrośet paribhāṣetāhaṃ ca" nāma nairayikaṃ
20
23
duḥkhamanubhavāmi yūyaṃ ca mḙ” uttari" paripṛcchatha" kenaitat tava
24
duḥkhamiti| atha te mitrajñātisālohitās taṃ puruṣamevaṃ L15r
25
26
28
29
vadeyur” mā bhair mā bhair" bhoḥ puruṣa supto hi tvam' na
1
te
Em. following LVP: āpadyeta. P: Ø; Q: āpadyate; B, D, J, L: āpadya-
2 P: Ø; Q: vibuddhah; D: °ddha; J, L: pati°
3 PsP Tib: sad par
gyur zhing rlom pa dang bcas pas :: prativibuddhah samānah; VMD
Tib P, Gondhla, sTog, Phug brag 1: slar sad (Gondhla: bsad) pa :: pra-
tivibuddhaḥ samānaḥ; VMD Tib Phug brag 2: n.e. prativibuddhaḥ
samānah 4 P: Ø; L: duhkh 5 P: Ø; Q: krandeta; D: krandata
6 P: Ø; B, J, L: ścoce; D: ścocen
7P: Ø; Q: parivet; D: paridevat
8 D: tasva
L: °sārohitām
9 B: °sārohitāh; D: °jñātimālohitāh; J: °jñānisārohitah;
10 L: pariprch(?)eyu
11 B: kinatat; D: kenet(?)at;
J: kenatat; L: kenata; PsP1: kena tat; PsP Tib: 'di ltar : etat; VMD
Tib: n.e. etat 12 P: (ta)va ; B, D, J: te; L: tre ; PsPL: te
13 B: °sāro-
14 B, J: vedayet; D: vaden; L: vadayet
hitān; D: mitraijñātiº
15
Q: adds following me; D: nairayirkama; PsP Tib: nges; VMD Tib:
bdag 16 L: duhkhamm
17
Q: akrośeta; D: okrosen 18 B, D, J, L:
paribhāset | a° (J: ||); PsP1: paribhāset (half-danda) a°
19 D: va
20 Although classical Sanskrit's sandhi rules would dictate a change
21 PsP Tib: n.e.
to ma, I accept the mss' me in the present citation.
me uttari; VMD Tib: nga la 22 Em. following LVP: °tha. P: Ø; Q:
°ta; B, D, J, L: °ta L: tave
23
24 D: first repeats sa tān mitrajñati-
25 D, L °yu
sālohitān evam vadet nairayikam duhkham anubhutam
6 D: mā hai
26
27 Q: mā bhir; L: om.; D: mā hair; PsPL: om. ma
bhair; Tib: ma 'jigs shig 28 Q: bho 29 D: saptoB16r
230
CRITICAL EDITION
4
1
2
tvamito gṛhāt kvacin nirgataḥ | tasya punarapi smṛtir utpadyeta
supto'ham abhūvam | vitathametan mayā parikalpitam
3
5
7
8
abhūtam iti | sa punar api saumanasya pratilabhate ||
19
10
12
tadyathā bhagavan sa puruṣo 'satsamāropeṇa" suptaḥ svapnāntara-
13
15
16
gato” narakagatam ātmānaṃ sañjānīyāt evam eva bhagavan "
sarvabālapṛthagjanā asadrāgaparyavanaddhāḥ strīnimittaṃ kalpa-
20
21
yanti”| te strīnimittaṃ kalpayitvā tābhiḥ sārdhaṃ ramamāṇam
22
23
24
26
ātmā” sañjānanti | tasya bālapṛthagjanasyaivaṃ bhava
14
17
11
25 J: prthag°
27
28
29
ahaṃ puruṣa" iyaṃ strī mamaiṣā strī | tasya te chandarāgaparya-
13 P: Ø; J: svantaragato 14 L: ātsāmam
17
29 J, L: tena tasya
6
25
6Q: pari-
3
7
1 D: nirgataih 2 Q: utpadyate; B, J, L: utpadyate; PsP1: utpadyate
D: suptoh
4 J: hamm
5 Q: abhūd; B: anubhūvam
parikalpitam Q: anubhūtam; B, D, J, L: anubhūtam; LVP (PsPL
52, n. 1) does not include anubhūtam or emend to abhūtam, but does
note that his mss read anubhūtam; PsP Tib: yang dag pa ma yin pa'di
bdag gis kun tu brtags so : vitatham etan mayā parikalpitam abhū-
tam. VMD Tib P, Gondhla, sTog, Phug brag 1 : yang dag pa ma yin pa
dngos po med pa de la bdag gis brtags pa lta zhig ste | dngos po ci
yang med do; VMD Tib Phug brag 2 : bdag gis phyin ci log gis brtags
par gyur to
Ø; D: purusāh
10 p:
8 D: eti 9 D: saumenasyam; J: somanasyam
11 P: Ø; B, J, L: °samārāpena; D: samārāyev(?)ā
15 D: evay
12 J: supta
16
18
D: °vat Q: asadvāsanāparyava°; L: asadāga°; PsP Tib: bden
pa ma lags pa'i 'dod chags kyis kun nas bcings pa; VMD Tib P:
mchis pa ma lags pa'i 'dod chags kyis kun tu dkris pas 'Q: kal-
panti Q: strīnittam
20 L: tābhi 21 D: vamamānamm; J: °mā-
22
nam; L: ramamāśam
J: om.
J: samjānamanti; L: sajānamti
24Q: tasyaivam
26 D: bhavatā (ā sandhi)
27 D:
°sah
19
23
28 B, J, L: imam5
10
nāti ||
3
4
vasthitena' cittena bhogaparyeṣṭa cittaṃ krāmati | sa tatonidānaṃ
8
9
kalahavigrahavivādaṃ sañjanayati | tasya praduṣṭendriyasya vairaṃ॰ sañjā-
yate | sa tena sañjñāviparyāsena kālagataḥ samāno bahūni
kalpasahasrāṇi narakeṣu duḥkhāṃ vedanāṃ vedayamānamātmānaṃ sañjā-
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
11
12
tadyathā bhagavaṃs tasya puruṣasya mitrajñātisālohi evaṃ vada-
nti mā bhair mā bhair bhoḥ puruṣa supto hi tvam' na tvam" ito
13
14
15
16
18
.21
ntaś cittaviparyāsaviparyastānāṃ sattvānām evaṃ
17
gṛhāt kutaścin” nirgata iti | evam eva bhagavan buddhā bhagava-
19
20
622
231
J, L: samjananti
°sālohitāti
B: °vāms; D: °vana
13 P, Q: bho; D: bhāh
17 L: e
5
16 P: kutaścitan
1 D: paryavasthitamna; J, L: chandarāgaparyavasānaddhāh repeat
(now with previous deletions included): strīnimittam kalpayanti te
strī nimittam kalpayitvā tābhih sārddha ramamānam ātmānam sam-
jananti || tasya bālaprthagjanasyaivam bhavaty aham purusa imam stri
mamaiṣām strī tasya tena chandarāgaparyavasthitena; PsP Tib: 'dun
pa'i 'dod chags : chandarāga° 2 B, J, L: bhogaparyastau; D: bhā-
gaparyasthau; PsP1: bhogaparyestim; PsP Tib: spyod tshol bar
nittam 4 B, J, L: krāmayati; PsP1: krāmayati; PsP Tib: 'jug par
'gyur 5 L: tatonidrānam 6 Em. following LVP: vairam. P: vairah;
Q: vairasya; B, D, J, L: vairah
7Q: jāyate 8 D: samāloka; PsP
3 D:
Tib: rlom pa dang bcas pa : samānah: rlom pa dang bcas pa de du
shes phyin ci log des 'chi bai dus bgyis par gyur nas :: sa tena sam-
jñāviparyāsena kālagatah samāno
9 J: bahūni
10 B: samjānāmti;
12 J: °sālohitāsalohitā; L:
14 D: svam
15 B, J, L: itā
11
18 PsP Tib: bcom Idan 'das rnams kyis
kyang
19 B, D: caturviparyāsa°; L: catraviparyāsa°; J: catuvi...sta-
nā; PsP Tib, VMD Tib: phyin ci log bzhis : cittaviparyāsa॰. The
traditional four errors are not topical in the passage.
20 J: sattvo-
nām
21 J: eva
22
2² J, L: dharma
J19r
L15vB16v
D9r
J19v
232
CRITICAL EDITION
1
2 3
5
6
deśayanti' nātra strī na puruṣoṃ na sattvo na jīvo na puruṣoṃ na
8
9
10
pudgalaḥ | vitathā ime sarvadharmāḥ | asanta ime sarvadharmāḥ" |
12
13
viṭhapitā ” ime sarvadharmāḥ | māyopamā ime sarvadharmāḥ | svapnopa- PsPL53
mā ime sarvadharmāḥ| nirmitopamā ime sarvadharmāḥ| dakacandropamā
14
15
16
ime sarvadharmāḥ| iti vistaraḥ | ta imāṃ tathāgatasya dharmadeśanāṃ
17
22
śrutvā vigatarāgān sarvadharmān paśyanti vigatadoṣān"
sarvadharmān paśyanti | vigatamohān " sarvadharmān paśyanti
19
20
21
asvabhāvān anāvaraṇān| ta ākāśasthitena cetasā kālaṃ
|
2
3 D: ne
1 D: daśayamti
± B, D, J, L: °sā
4 B, J, L: satvā
7 B, J: pumgalo; L: purngalo 8 D : nitatha
9 Q:
6
jiva 6 Q: poso
sarvadharmā
14 B, J, L: udaka°; D: dekecandropamā; PsP1:
10 P: om. asanta ime sarvadharmāh | vithapitā ime
sarvadharmāh; Q: om. asanta ime sarvadharmāh; PsP Tib: chos 'di
dag thams cad ni yod pa ma yin pa | chos 'di dag thams cad ni phyin
ci log gis bsgrubs pa : asanta ime sarvadharmāh | vithapitā ime sar-
vadharmāh; VMD Tib: chos 'di dag thams cad ni med pa'o | chos 'di
dag thams cad ni rnams par bsgrubs pa’o : asanta ime sarvadharmah
| vithapita ime sarvadharmāh
11 D: °dharmāse
12 D: vithayitā
13 J: māye(?)pamā
udaka° 15
16
B, J, L: vistarah PsP Tib: de bzhin du : imām : de
bzhin du de dag de bzhin gshegs pa'i chos bstan pa thos nas; VMD
Tib P, Gondhla, sTog, Phug brag 1 : de dag gis de bzhin gshegs pati
chos (P: chos de) thos nas : ta imām tathāgatasya dharmadeśanam
śrutvā; VMD Tib Phug brag 2: de rnams de bzhin gshegs pa las chos
thos pas
17 D: sarvasarvadharmāḥ 18 B, D, J, L: om.; PsP1: om.
vigatadoşān; PsP Tib supports doşa (BHS for dvesa): zhe sdang dang
bral pa; VMD Tib Gondhla, sTog, Phug brag 1 : zhe sdang ma mchis
pa; VMD Tib P, Phug brag 2: zhe sdang dang bral ba
19 B, D, J, L:
om.; PsPL: om. sarvadharmān 20 B, D, J, L: om.; PsP1: om. paśyanti
21 D: °māhān 22 D: athabhavon
5 D:
55
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
kurvanti| te kālagatāḥ samānā nirupadhiśeṣe nirvāṇaghātau P10r
parinirvānti| evam ahaṃ bhagavan narakān paśyāmi||
4
5
iti ||
§80. uktaṃ cāryopāliparipṛcchāyām
6
9
3
233
7
8
10
bhaya darśita nairayikaṃ me satvasahasra savejita naike|
11
12
13
14
na" ca vidyati kaściha satvo yo cyutu gacchati ghoram apā-
15
yam ||
4 D:
7 D: darsitai
1
J: kuvanti 2 B, D, J, L: sāmānāḥ; PsP₁: sāmānāḥ
eham
5 Q: nārakān
6 L: caryopāriprchāyām
8 D: vairayikam; L: °ka
9 ³B, J, L: °sahasram; D: °sahasvam
10 Em. following LVP and Python (1973: 59): savejita. P: samvejitu;
Q: samvejita; B, J, L: vejitum; D: vajitum. samvejita appears in P’s
equivalents for PsP₁ 191.2-9 and 234.11f. A prosodically short nasal
(savejita) probably stands behind P and Q's readings, but this short
nasal can only be written either as samvejita (nasalization marked but
prosodically incorrect) or as savejita (prosodically correct but nasali-
zation unmarked). sãvejitu is also possible; cf. BHSG §8.30.
11
ra
12 Q: kaściha, but a di from the lower margin is marked to be
inserted after ᵒci; B, D, J: kaścit; L: ka | ścit. Like Python (1973: 59),
I understand kaściha as intending kaśc'iha; P attests kaściha here and
in the passages equivalent to PSP₁ 191.2-9 and 234.11f.
13 D: satvā;
PSPL: satva; Python (1973: 59): sattva. The (irregular) dodhaka metre
(see PSPL 53, n. 4) expects a long syllable. P also attests satvo in the
passages equivalent to PSP₁ 191.2-9 and 234.11f.
14 P: cyutta; Q:
cyuta; D: vyatu. P attests cyutta (probably a misreading of cyutu) in
its passage equivalent to PSP₁ 191.2-9 but cyutu in the passage
equivalent to 234.11f. The a/u variation may merely represent differ-
ent ways of writing a vowel that was perhaps close to ŏ or ǝ and for
which a specific grapheme was not available. D: ayāyam
15
3 D: şa
D:234
CRITICAL EDITION
3
4
na ca kāraṇakāraka'santī' yehi kṛtā asitomaraśastrāḥ |
kalpavaśena tu paśyati tatra kāyi patanti apāyi' ta' śastrāḥ ||
citramanoramasajjitapuṣpāḥ svarṇavimāna jalanti manojñāḥ|
8
1 Em. following Python: kāraṇakāraka. P, Q: kārakakāraṇa (P attests
this reading in the passages equivalent to PSP₁ 191.2-9 and 234.11f.);
B: kārakakāraṇam; D, J, L: kārakakāraṇa; Python (cf. 1973: 59; 128,
n. 6) discards LVP's kāraku kāraṇa for kāraṇa-kāraka on the basis of
the Upāliparipṛcchā Tib and Chinese. PsP Tib: gang dag ral gri mda’
chen mtshon 'byin pa'i || gnod pa byed pa yod pa ma yin te. BHSD
s.v. kāraṇā: “torture, torment, esp. applied to the torments of hell."
2 PSP₁ and Python: santi. Ms P also attests santī in the passages equi-
valent to PSP₁ 191.2-9 and 234.11f. The dodhaka metre expects a long
final syllable. On the lengthening of historic i to ī in BHS verses, see
BHSG §3.12; even in cases of short i at the end of pāda, BHSG §26.2.
³ D: yamhi
4 Em. following LVP and Python: °tomaraśastrāḥ. P:
ºtomaravarśāḥ; Q: ᵒtomaravarṣāḥ; B, J, L: ºtomaravarṣāḥ; D: isito-
mamaiv(?)arṣāḥ; P attests °śastrā in the passage equivalent to PsP₁
191.2-9 and sastrāḥ in the passage equivalent to 234.11f. PSPL'S
tomaraśastrāḥ may represent a silent emendation. 5 B, J: āpāyi; D:
ayāpi; LVP connects apāyi with the next word to form apāyita
6 D:
3
te
7 Em. following LVP and Python: °puṣpāḥ (Python, however,
presents citra manorama sajjita puṣpāḥ). Like Python, I accept PsPL's
sajjitaᵒ, which is based on the faulty reading ᵒsajjitā° attested by
either the Calcutta or Paris ms used by LVP (Cambridge, i.e., my ms
L, reads ºsamjñitaº) and has descended from ms J’s ºsamjñitaº. P:
citramanoramasamjñitaśreṣṭāḥ (similarly in the equivalent passage in
P for PSP₁ 191.2-9 but ᵒsajñitaº in the passage equivalent to PSPL
234.11f.); Q: cittamanoramasamjitaśreṣṭāḥ; B, J, L: ºsamjñitaśreṣṭāḥ;
D: ᵒsamjñitaśrestoh. Upāliparipṛcchã and PsP Tib: sna tshogs yid
dga' me tog kha bye zhing ||. PsP Tib has been copied in from Upāli-
paripṛcchā Tib. Q: jvalanti; B, L: jvalamti; J: jvalanti; P attests
jvalanti in the passages equivalent to PSPL 191.2-9 and 234.11f. The
8
PSP₁ 545
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
3
teṣvapi kāraku' nāstiha kaścit te 'pi ca sthāpita kalpa-
vaśena ||
iti ||
4
kalpavaśena vikalpitu lokaḥ sañjñagaheṇa vikalpitu bālaḥ |
8
9
10
13
14
so ca gaho agaho" asabhūto" māyamarīcisamā hi
vikalpāḥ ||
235
6
dodhaka metre requires a short syllable.
1 P: kāraka; Q: kārakan; B, J, L: kāraka; P reads kāraku in the pas-
sages equivalent to PsPL 191.2-9 and 234.11f.
2 Q: nāstīha; I under-
stand nāstiha as intending nāst'iha
dodhaka metre expects a long syllable.
3 PsPL and Python: kaści; the
4 D: kalpa 5 P: cakalpitu;
6
10
B, J: vikalpatu; D: yatu; L: vikalpayatu; Tib: rnam brtags. Pattests
vikalpitu in the passage equivalent to PsPL 191.2-9 but tu vikalpita
that equivalent to PsPL 234.11f. Em. following LVP and Python:
sañjñagahena. P : samjñagrahena; Q: samjñāgrahena; B, L: °grahena;
D: samjñaprahena; J: samjñāgrahena. P attests samjñagrahena in the
passages equivalent to PsPL 191.2-9 and 234.11f. The dodhaka metre
requires a short syllable. 7 Q: vikalpito; B, J, L: vikalpayatu; D:
cikalpapatu 8 B, L: sā 9 P: tra, but P attests ca in the passages
equivalent to PsPL 191.2-9 and 234.11f. Em. following LVP and
Python: gaho. P, Q: graho; B, J, L: graho; D: grahā (ā sandhi). P
attests graho in the passages equivalent to PsPL 191.2-9 and 234.11f.
The dodhaka metre requires a short syllable. 11 Em. following LVP
and Python: agaho. P, Q: 'graho; B, J: 'graho; D: agreho; L: om. P
attests 'graho in the passages equivalent to PsPL 191.2-9 and 234.11f.
The dodhaka metre requires a short syllable.
12 P: 'sabhūto; Q:
'sadbhūto; B, J: asadbhūto. P attests respectively sadbhūto and 'sad-
bhūto in the passages equivalent to PsPL 191.2-9 and 234.11f. 3 B:
māyāma°; Python (1973: 60 ) presents māyāma° but the dodhaka
metre demands a short syllable.
14 B: hita
13236
3
tadevam asatsvabhāvā bhāvāḥ svaviparyāsaviṭhapitā bālānāṃ
saṅkeśahetavo bhavanti saṃsāra iti sthitam ||
4
CRITICAL EDITION
1
5
yathā ca mṛṣāsvabhāvānāṃ padārthānāṃ saṅkeśavyavadānahetutvam' tathā
madhyamakāvatārād vistareṇāvaseyam ||
6
L16r §81. atrāha’ – yadi svataḥ parata ubhayato 'hetutaś ca nāsti 5
8
9
J20r bhāvānāmutpādaḥ' tat katham avidyāpratyayāḥ saṃskārā ityuktaṃ
10
Q9a bhagavatā ||
11
12
ucyate - saṃvṛtir eṣā na tattvam ||
2
13
14
§82. kiṃ saṃvṛter vyavasthā na vaktavyā ||
18
15
16
17
idampratyayatāmātreṇa saṃvṛteḥ siddhir abhyupagamyate | na tu pakṣa - 10
19
20
catuṣṭayābhyupagamena sasvabhāvavādaprasaṅgāt tasya cāyuktatvāt |
3 P:
5 Tib: n.e. ca
6 P: °āvaśeyam; B, J, L:
7 D: atrāhā
9 D: kath
1 P: asvabhāva; B, D, J, L: atasvabhāva; PsP1: ete 'svabhāvā; Tib yod
pa ma yin pa’i rang bzhin can 2 Q: °viparyasa°; Tib: n.e. sva
samklesa °
4 L: sthite
vistarenā°; D: °nāveseyam
8 B, D, J, L: tatra; PsPL:
tatra; Tib: n.e. tat
10 D: °to
11 B, J, L: samvrti
12 B, D, J, L: evā; PsP1: eva; Tib: 'di. De Jong (1978: 33) emends to
esā on the basis of Tib and D’s reading samvrtir eseti at its equivalent
for PsPL 67.11. 13 B, D: °te; J, L: savrte B: vyavasthānam vak-
tavyā :: vyavasthā na vaktavyā; J: vyavasthānam varvyakta (‘1’ writ-
ten over kta, ‘2’ over rvya) : vyavasthā na vaktavyā; PsP1: vyava-
sthānam vaktavyam; Tib: ci kun rdzob kyi rnam par gzhag pa brjod
15 D: °pratyayatāmatraiśa
16
par bya ba yin nam zhe na
6 B, D, J,
14
18 B: °catustayātyupa°; D:
L: °tah 17 D: etyupa°; L: abhupa°
stayātyupagamena 19 P: svabhāva°; Q: sasvabhāvabhāvavāda°; D:
sasvabhāvadhāda°; Tib: dngos po rang bzhin dang bcas pa smra bar5
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
PsP, 55 idampratyayatāmātrābhyupagame hi sati hetuphalayor anyonyāpekṣatvān
5
nāsti svābhāvikī siddhir iti nāsti sasvabhāvavādaḥ || ata
evoktam –
7
svayaṅkṛtaṃ parakṛtaṃ' dvābhyāṃ kṛtam ahetukam |
tārkikair iṣyate' duḥkhaṃ tvayā tūktaṃ" pratītyajam ||
8
10
iti ||
ihāpi vakṣyati
12
10 iti ||
2
13
14
pratītya kārakaḥ karma taṃ pratītya ca kārakam |
karma pravartate nānyat paśyāmaḥ siddhikāraṇam ||
15
19
bhagavatāpyetāvanmātram evoktam tatrāyaṃ dharmasaṅketo yadutā-
smin॰ satīdaṃ bhavatyasyotpādādidamutpadyate yadutāvidyāpratyayāḥ"
saṃskārāḥ saṃskārapratyayaṃ vijñānam ityādi ||
18
20
237
|
Q: yadudasmin; D: °smi
19 D: vijñānamm 20
20 D: vāyu°
thal bar ’gyur ba'i phyir
1 D: °pratyayavāmātrātyupagame; L: idampratyatahtāmātra° 2 B, J,
L: °yār
3 J: svābhāvikām
4 D: eti
5 D: sasvabhāvapādah; L:
°vādamh; Tib: dngos po rang bzhin dang bcas par smra ba(r) : sasva-
bhāvavādah 6 P: parākrtam; D: om.
11
kair; D: tārkiker; J: tākikair
9 D: isyete
bhūktam; L: bhūtam 12 B, J, L: vaksyatam iti
16
15 D: evektam
18 p: om.
7 L: ahetum 8 P: tākim-
10 D: tvayo
B, D:
13 P: kārakam
17 L:
14
L: pratītyā
yadutāvidyapretyayah
17
°B: °dihJ20v
238
CRITICAL EDITION
1
§83. atra kecit paricodayanti
2
.3
anutpannā bhāvā iti kim ayaṃ pramāṇa
6
pramāṇajaḥ| tatra yadi pramāṇa vaktavyam
|
5
niścaya utā-
9
8
-
10
11
12
13
kati pramāṇāni kiṃlakṣaṇāni kiṃviṣayāṇi" kiṃ svata utpannāni
kiṃ parata ubhayato 'hetuto" veti | athāpramāṇajaḥ sa na yuktaḥ 5
pramāṇādhīnatvāt prameyādhigamasya | anadhigato hyartho na vinā
pramāṇair adhigantuṃ“ śakyata iti pramāṇābhāvādarthādhigamābhāve
15
16 .17
18
sati kuto bhavato 'yaṃ samyagniścaya iti na yuktametad anu-
P:
pare codayanti. The scribe wrote pari° but then erased the medial
i to change pari to pare (pare may represent a deliberate change).
Q: om. Q: om.; B, J, L: iyam 4 D: °jā; J, N: °jyo; L: pramāna-
2
3
kro 5 P: 0; B, J, L: niścaye; D: niśca uya
tatra yadi pramāṇaja
tadadam; Tib: n.e. tadā
10
9
6 P: Ø; L: pramānajah ||
P: ⊗; L: isyata 8 P: tadevam; Q: om.; D:
P: va(kt)+[1]; L: vektavyam B, J, L:
°ni; D: kimcisayani 11 B, D, J, L: °ta 12 Tib: ci bdag las skyes pa
zhig gam | gzhan nam gnyi ga'am rgyu med pa las yin zhes bya ba :
kim svata utpannāni kim parata ubhayato 'hetuto veti
adhigantu
13 J: n
14 J:
15
` Tib: tshad ma med pas don rtogs pa yang med na :
pramānābhāvād arthādhigamābhāve sati 16 P: Ø; B, D, J, L: om.;
PsP1: om. bhavato; Tib: khyod kyi. The lack of bhavato in the paper
mss may be due to an eyeskip from °to of kuto to °to of bhavato. The
missing part of P’s line of writing might allow for bhavato.
17 P: Ø;
Q: om.; Tib: 'di. Q's loss of 'yam may have occurred when Q's
scribe’s eye skipped from yam to sam of samyag° (the aksara mya is
written as a conjunct). Although avagrahas occur less frequently in
the palm-leaf mss than in the paper mss, there is a slightly unusual
danda with a thick middle preceding samyag° in Q which may repre-
sent the misinterpretation of an avagraha (Q reads bhavatah | samyag-
ni°). 18 P: Ø; D: samyakaniśyaya; J: °niscayePsPL 56
5
10
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
2
3
tpannā bhāvā iti | yato vāyaṃ niścayo bhavato 'nutpannā bhāvā
5
239
6
iti bhaviṣyati' tata eva mamāpi sarvabhāvāḥ santīti | yathā L16v
19
sarvabhāvāḥ ||
10
cāyaṃ te niścayo॰ 'nutpannāḥ sarvabhāvā' iti tathaiva
|
12
13
14
sarvabhāvotpattir” bhaviṣyati | atha te nāsty ayaṃ niścayo
'nutpannāḥ sarvabhāvā iti tadā svayamaniścitasya parapratyāyanā - B17v
sambhavāc” chāstrārambhavaiyarthyam॰ eveti” santy apratiṣiddhāḥ
18
11
mamāpi " P10v
iti ||
21
ucyate – yadi kaścin" niścayo nāmāsmākaṃ " syāt sa pramāṇa-
22
23
24
jo vā syādapramāṇajo vā | vasta| kiṃ kāraṇam| ihāniśca-
4 D: ra
2 P: vācāyam; Q: nāyam; B, J,
1 p
P: Ø; B, J, L: °no; PsPL: anispannā
L: cāyam
3 B, J, L: bhaveta 4 P: Ø; B, J, L: mayāpi; D: mamāyi
5 P: Ø; D: °bhāvā; L: dv(?)ibhāvāh 6 J: tathā 7 D: vāyam; L: cāya
8 L: śvayo
9 P: sarvadharmā; B, D, J, L: sarvadharmā; PsPL: sarva-
dharmā; Tib: dngos po thams cad. The citation in PsP Tib has been
directly translated from PsP Sanskrit, i.e., was not, like the majority
of the citations in the PsP, copied in from a pre-existing Tibetan trans-
1 L: sasāpi
12 2 D:
10
11
lation of the source work.
14
15
L: tathaica
°bhāvātpatti; J: °patti; L: rvabhāvatpatti
ayam; Tib: 'di
4P: Ø; B, J, L: °nā
tyayanā° 16 P: ⊗; D: °rambhavayathām
ddhāh; B: °dhā; J, L: apratiddha
19 L: sarvabhāsa
21 J, L: nāsmākam; conj. by LVP: nā[mā]smākam
D, J, L: °jā
13 P: Ø; B, D, J, L: om.
5 p: Ø; B, D, J, L: parapra-
18
17 L: aveti
Q: °si-
D: kaści
22 D: °ja
20
23 B,
24D9v
240
J21r
CRITICAL EDITION
3
4
5
yasambhave' sati syāt tatpratipakṣa tadapekṣo niścayaḥ | yadā v
tv
2
aniścayaṃ॰ eva tāvadasmākaṃ nāsti tadā kutas tadviruddho niścayaḥ
.
syāt sambandhyantaranirapekṣatvāt| kharaviṣāṇasya hrasvadīrghatāvat |
11
612
yadā caivaṃ॰ niścayasyābhāvaḥ | tadā kasya " prasiddhyarthaṃ pramāṇāni PsPL57
14
15
18
Q9v parikalpayiṣyāmaḥ”| kuto vaiṣāṃ saṅkhyā lakṣaṇaṃ" viṣayo” vā
19
20
21
bhaviṣyati svataḥ parata ubhayato hetu vā samutpatti iti
22
23
sarvam etan na vaktavyamasmābhiḥ ||
1
Q: ihaniścaya°; B, J: ihāniścayasebhāve; D: ihāniścayasambhava; L:
23
ihāniścayasabhave 2 P: pratipaksyas; B: tatpratipekṣas 3 Q: tadā-
pekso; B, J, L: °sā; D tadapraksā 4 Tib adds yang: de’i gnyen por
gyur pa'i nges pa yang
5 B, J, L: sv; Tib: n.e. tu 6 Q: aniściya
7 P: 0; B: teviruddhā; D: tadviruddhā; J: taviruddhā; L: taviruddhā-
viruddhā; PsPL: tadviruddhāviruddho. LVP (PsPL 56, n. 4) notes that
Tib suggests tadviruddho: Tib: de dang 'gal ba. Stcherbatsky (1927:
136, n. 4) emends to tadviruddho. 8 P: ⊗; Q: sambandhyantarape-
ksatvāt; B, J, L: sabandhya°; Tib: 'brel pa can gzhan la ma ltos pai
9 P: ¬; B: kharavikhānasya
phyir
11
10 p: vain; Tib: n.e. ca 1B:
kasya tadā
12 B, L: °tha; D: pratiddhyartham; J: prasiddhārtha
13 P: (pa)ri[1]yisyāmah; D: parikatthayisyāmah
14 D: bhavo; Tib:
grangs dang mtshan nyid dang yul dang | bdag gam gzhan nam gnyi
ga ’am rgyu med pa las skye zhes bya bar yang ga la 'gyur te :: kuto
vaisām sankhyā laksanam visayo vā bhavisyati svatah parata ubhaya-
to 'hetuto vā samutpattir iti
15 5 B, J, L: caisām
17 B, D, J, L: visaya 18 P, Q: om.
19 B, J, L: hayisyati
following LVP: 'hetuto. P, Q: om. 'hetuto; B, D, J, L: om. 'hetuto; Tib:
rgyu med pa las 21 D: mamutpattir; L: emu | tpattir
16 D: leksanam
20 Em.
22 D: sa-
vamm
3 J, L: ebhan
5PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
2
3
§84. yadyevaṃ niścayo nāsti bhavataḥ kathaṃ punar idaṃ niścitarūpaṃ
4
5
6
vākyam upalabhyate bhavatām svapirato na dvābhyāṃ
10
11
nāpyahetuto bhāvā bhavantīti |
12
ucyate
16
s pattyā nāryāṇāma ||
241
niścitam” idaṃ” vākyaṃ” lokasya svaprasiddhayaivopa-
18
kiṃ" khalv āryāṇām upapattir" nāsti |
§85.
22
24
25
kenaitad uktam" asti" vā” nāsti" veti | paramārtho hy āryas
tūṣṇībhāvaḥ | tataḥ kutas tatra prapañcasambhavo yata” upapattir anu-
26
4
1P: (bh)ava(t)a(h); B, D: sarvatah; J, L: sarvata; PsP1: sarvatah; Tib:
khyod la 2 P: Ø; D: pranar; L: puna
3 p: Ø; L: ditam
Q: vā-
hyam 5 B, J, L: upalabhate 6 P: bhavatā(m); B, J, L: bhavato; Tib:
khyed cag gi (khyod la was used as the equivalent for bhavatah). bha-
vatām at PsPL 57.4 must represent a silent correction made by LVP on
the basis of Tib or be the result of a scribal error that entered L’s
tradition (the two mss used by LVP in addition to L both descend
from J, which attests bhavato). 7P: Ø; D: svati 8 P: 0; D: nāmpi
9
± B, D, J, L: °ta 10 B, J, L: bhāvyabhavantiti 11 Tib: n.e. bhavanti
5 P: vākya
15
12
2 B, J, L: ucyata
13 L: išcitam
14 D: idam
16 Em. following LVP: svaprasiddhayaivopapattyā. P: svaprasiddha-
yevopapattyā; Q: svapraddhayai°; B, J, L: svaprasiddheyamcopapa-
18
17 D, J: ki
ttyā; D: °yaivāpayattyā
D: bhūlv; Tib: n.e. khalu
21
D: atti; L: | sti
19
D: apapattir; J, L: °tti 20 B, J, L: ustam
26
22 L: om.
23 L: om.
24 P: ceti; B, J, L: ceti 25 J: āryam; conj. by
LVP: āry[ānām]; Tib: 'phags pa rnams kyi don dam pa :: paramārtho
hy āryas Q: tūsnīmbhāvas; B, D: tusnībhāvas; J, L: bhūsnībha-
vas; PsPL: tūsnīmbhāvah. 27 B, D, J, L: yad; PsPL: yad; Tib: gang la.
yatah is the conjunction usually employed by Candrakīrti in such
constructions.242
CRITICAL EDITION
papatti vā syāt ||
3
4
5
§86. yadi hy āryā upapattiṃ na varṇanti ke
paramārthaṃ lokaṃ bodhayiṣyanti ||
.9
L17T
na khalv āryā lokasaṃvyavahāreṇopapattiṃ varṇayanti | kiṃ tu lokata
10
11
12
13
14
eva yā prasiddhopapattiḥ | tāṃ parāvabodhārtham abhyupetya tayaiva
15
18
khalvidānīṃ
16
17
B18r
loka bodhayanti | yathaiva " hi vidyamānām api śarīrā-
śucitāṃ” viparyāsānugatā” rāgiṇo" nopalabhante śubhākāraṃ
21
22
23
24
625
cābhūtam adhyāropya॰ parikliśyante | teṣāṃ vairāgyārthaṃ tathāgata-
28
29
30
nirmito" devo” vā śubhañjñā prā pracchāditān kāya-
32
31
33
34
doṣān¨ upavarṇayet – santy asmin kāye keśā ityādinā | 10
35
36
37
38
39
te ca tasyāḥ” śubhasañjñāyā vigamād vairāgyam āsādayeyuḥ | PsP_58
2 P: a+ya; D: aya; J: ārṣā
6 L: °nī 7 J, L: °tha
3 D: upettim 4 P: n.; D: ne
8 J: āyā 9 D: lokasamvyavahāro-
5
14 B, J,
15
1 J: anu°
Q: ke
nopapattim
10 D: prasiddhāpa°
11 Tib: de dag : tām, possibly
because tām was understood to represent a collection of reasonings
12 B: pravabo°; J, L: pavabodhartham
13 D, L: atyuyetya
L: mamaiva B: laukam
Tib: n.e. eva, n.e. hi
18 B: °mānām
sminu(?)setā
21 J: rāgino
22 P: nopalabhyante; D:
23 B, J, L: adhyāroṣya
24 L: pariklisyate
nām; D: vaironyārtham; J: vairāgyārn (?) ā; L : vairāgyaram
L: °ta; D: °nirmīta B, D, J, L: deva
prāka L: chāditān 31 B, D, J, L: kāmadosa°; Tib: lus kyi skyon
17 D: yathiva;
20 D: vipaya-
nāmapalabha-
25 B: vairāgyā-
nte
26
26 B, J,
29 D:
27
28 B, J, L: 'śubha°
30
32 D: santv
33 B, L: kāya
34 B, J, L: dinā; conj. by LVP: [ityā]di-
na; Tib: zhes bya ba la sogs pas
37 B, J, L: visamā; conj. by LVP: vimuktā; Tib: bral pas
gyam 9 L: °yesuh
35 B, J, L: tasyā 36 B, J, L: °yām
38 D: verā-
39
16 D: byādhayanti
19 L: Śarirā°
5PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
evam ihāy' āryaiḥ sarvathāpyanupalabhyamānātmakaṃ bhāvānām
avidyātimiropahatamatinayatā viparītaṃ svabhāvamadhyāropya J21v
5 6
7
8
kvacic ca kañcid viśeṣamatitarāṃ parikliśyanti pṛthagjanāḥ | tān
9
12
4
10
idānīm āryās tatprasiddhayaivopapattyā" paribodhayanti – yathā
"
13
5 vidyamānasya ghaṭas na mṛdādibhya utpāda ity abhyupetam'
16
617
18
pūrvaṃ vidyamānasya ghaṭasya vidyamānatvān
28
14
29
243
evam utpādāt
20
21
22
23
nāsty utpādal̤e ity avasīyatām | yathā ca parabhūtebhyo
26
30
vivakṣitebhyo” 'pi bījādibhyo nāstīty avasīyatām ||
31
10 §87. athāpi syāt - anubhava eṣo 'smākam iti |
3
15
25
27
jvālāṅgārādibhyo'ṅkarasyotpattir nāstīty abhyupetam | evaṃ
.
19
24
D: bhāvā-
1 D: ihāryy; Tib: de bzhin du ’di na so so’i skye bo dag kyang : evam
ihāpi ... prthagjanāh 2 D: āyaih; J: āyaih; L: aryaih
vām 4Q: °hatamati | nayanatayā
5 D: kvaci 6 P: ye; Q: yo; D:
pra; Tib: rang bzhin...dang | 'ga' zhig tu khyad par 'ga' zhig lhag
par sgro btags nas
8 D: °janā
7 P: kecid; D: kaicid; L: kamci
9 B, J, L: īdānīm 10 D: āyāyais
11 P tatprasiddhyaivopapattyā; Q:
°siddhayevo° (yai has been erased and replaced with ye); B: tatprasi-
ddhayevo°; J, L: tatprasiddhayecopa
12 Tib: n.e. yathā
13 D:
O
14
ghatasva B, D, L: mrdāditya 15 Q: abhyupeyam; B: upetam; D:
atyupetam; J: utyupetam; L: ahtyupetam
20
16 P: utpādānu; B, J, L:
19 J: °tvā J:
Q: om.; L:
17
18 Tib: yod pa la yang
utpāda
23
sty
26 D:
va
Q: pūrvva
21 D: atpāda
22 P: avaśīyatām; L: avasoyatām
24 D: pala°; L: °tetyo 25 B, J, L: jvālāmrāgādibhyo
dumkurasyātpatti; L: 'nkurasyātpattir 27 B: atyu°; D: atyupatam
28 J: viksitebhyo
29 L: bāmjādibhyo
30 P: avaśīyatām
| Tib:
’di ni kho bo cag gis nyams su myong ba yin : anubhava eşo ’smã
31
kamP11r
244
CRITICAL EDITION
1
2
4
etadapyayuktam| yasmād anubhava eṣa mṛṣānubhavatvāt taimirika-
dvicandrādyanubhavavad iti| tataś cānubhavasyāpi sādhyasamatvāt tena
pratyavasthānaṃ na yuktamiti ||
7
3
8
9
888. tasmād anutpannā bhāvā ity evaṃ tāvad viparītasva-
10
12
L17v rūpādhyāropapratipakṣeṇa prathamaprakaraṇārambhaḥ" | idānīṃ kvacid yaḥ 5
13
15
kaścid viśeṣo 'dhyāropitaḥ“| tadviśeṣāpākaraṇārthaṃ śeṣapra
16
17
18
karaṇārambho gantṛgantavyagamanādiko " 'pi niravaśeṣo viśeṣo "
1
Q: yasmā; Tib: 'di ltar nyams su myong ba ni brdzun pa'i don can
yin :: yasmād anubhava esa mrsā
2 L: eva esa
3 D: °tvot 4 P:
°dvicandrādyannabhavavad; B, L: °anubhavad; J: °dvicendrāghanu-
bhavad; conj by LVP: °anubha[va]vad; Tib: n.e. ādi
5 Tib: n.e. ca
6
J: pratyasthānam 7 Tib: zhes de dag la grags pa nyid kyis khong
du chud par mdzad pa yin no, i.e., Tib translates iti and then the
words tān tatprasiddhayaiva paribodhayanti, which occur in the
earlier Sanskrit sentence that sets forth, using the example of a pot,
the proof of non-arising from self. upapattyā of the Sanskrit sentence
has not been translated. 8 Tib: de'i phyir dngos po rnams skye ba
med pa yin no || de Itar re zhig de’i rang bzhin phyin ci log lhag par
sgro btags pa’i gnyen por rab tu byed pa dang po brtsams pa yin no ::
tasmād anutpannā bhāvā ity evam tāvad viparītasvarūpādhyāropa-
pratipaksena prathamaprakaranārambhah
9 D: avam
10 B, J: °ā-
dhyāroyapra°; D: °ādhyārāpapra°; L: viparītatasvarūpādhyārāyapra-
tipaksena 11 D: °prakaranācambha; J: prathamakaranarambhah; L:
prathamaprakaranarambhah 12 L: idr(?)ānī; Tib: de nas : idānīm
13 J, N: kacid
14 L: dhyāropi | tas 15 B: °visesāprakaranārtham
16 B, J: śeṣaprakaraṇārtham śeṣaprakaraṇārambhaḥ; L: śeṣaprakara-
nārtham śesaprakāranārambhah 17 D: ganty(?)gantavya°
om.; D: viśesā
18
Q:PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
nāsti pratītyasamutpādasyeti pratipādanārtham ||
1
§89. atha syāt eṣa eva pramāṇaprameyavyavahāroṃ laukiko B18v
4
5
'smābhiḥ śāstreṇānuvarṇita iti|
7
tadanuvarṇanasya' tarhi phalaṃ vācyam ||
14
8
PsPL59 §90. kutārkikaiḥ sa nāśito' viparītalakṣaṇābhidhānena tasyā-
smābhiḥ samyaglakṣaṇam uktamiti cet |
10
3
12
245
17
18
caitadevamiti vyartha“evāyaṃ prayatna iti ||
●
etadapyayuktam| yadi hi" kutārkikair viparītalakṣaṇapraṇayanakṛtaṃ
15
16
lakṣyavaiparītyaṃ lokasya syāt tadarthaṃ prayatnasāphalyaṃ॰ syāt' na_D10r
13
J22r
1
Q: pratītyasamutpādasyaiva (Tib n.e. eva); L: °syati; Tib: n.e. iti
2 D: °tha 3 B, J, L: °prameyamvyavahāra 4 D: °bhi 5 D: Śśa-
6 L: tadanuvarn(?)asyā
7 B, J, L: vākyam
strenā°; J, L: °vanita
8 Tib: rtog ge pa dag gyis : kutārkikaih. Tib adds an interpreted in-
9 D: °tā;
12 D:
strumental: rtog ge pa dag gyis ... de brlag par byas bas ...
L: °tau
11
10 D: samyakalaksanam Q: om.; Tib: n.e. hi
kumākike 13 P: °nam krtam; Q: °pranayam krtam; D: °laksana-
pranamyanam krtam; J, L: °nam krtam; PsPL: °nam krtam. Tib: gal te
'jig rten la rtog ge ngan pas mtshan nyid phyin ci log brjod pas byas
pa'i mtshon bya phyin ci log yod par 'gyur na ni. Vaidya (1960b:
20.15) emends silently to ° pranayanāt krtam. See Translation note.
P: na laksye vaiparītyam; B: laksā(?)vai°; J: lakşavai°
15 L: loka
14
16 J: prayahsāphalyam 17 D: vyartham 18 B, J, L: prayatnam246
CRITICAL EDITION
1
2
891. api ca yadi pramāṇādhīnaḥ prameyādhigamas tāni pramāṇāni
kena paricchidyanta ityādinā vigrahavyāvartanyāṃ vihito doṣaḥ|
tadaparihārāt samyaglakṣaṇadyotakatvamapi nāsti|
6
3
§92. kiṃ ca yadi svasāmānyalakṣaṇadvayānurodhena
pramāṇadvayamuktam'
8
9
10
11
12
yasya tal lakṣaṇadvayaṃ kiṃ tal" lakṣyam astyatha nāsti| 5
7
13
14
15
yadyasti tadā tadaparaṃ॰ prameyam astīti" kathaṃ pramāṇadvayam | atha
nāsti lakṣyaṃ tadā lakṣaṇamapi nirāśrayaṃ nāstīti kathaṃ pramāṇadvayam ||
vakṣyati hi –
16
17
18
lakṣaṇāsampravṛttau ca na lakṣyam” upapadyate |
lakṣyasyānupapattau ca lakṣaṇasyāpy asambhavaḥ||
19
20
iti ||
1 Q: not available as a witness because fol. 10 is missing (see Yone-
zawa 2005b: 160). Fol. 9b ends with prayatna iti |. Fol. 11a resumes
with dhānam adustam iti, i.e., it begins part-way through the com-
pound viśesanābhidhānam in the first sentence of PsPM §102 (PsPr
66.9). 2 Q: Ø; D: yati
3 Q: Ø; B, J: °na; L: prasānādhāna
Ø; D: prameyāhdhigamas; L: prame | yādhigamas
4 Q:
5 Q: Ø; D: °nyā
7 Q: Ø; D: svasāmānnalaksa-
6 Q: Ø; D: °parihārāta; L: °parihārot
8 Q: Ø; D: ta; N: tam 9 Q: Ø; L: laksanamdvayam 10 Q:0;
13 P: param; Q: Ø 14 Q: Ø; D: ahīti
na°
J: ki
Ø; J, L: laksam
pranānadvayam Q: Ø; B, J, L:
19
18 Q: Ø; D: upadyate
laksam
ksyana°
16
laksanāsamvrttau
Q: Ø; D: va
11 Q: Ø; B, J, L: om.; D: ta; PsPL: om. tal
12 P: laksam; Q:
15 Q: Ø; D:
17
Q: Ø; D:
Q: Ø; J, L: la-
20
10
PsPL 605
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
§93. atha syāt na lakṣyatene lakṣaṇam | kiṃ tarhi |
kṛtyalyuṭo' bahulamiti karmaṇi lyuṭaṃ kṛtvā lakṣyate taditi
lakṣaṇam ||
4
5
7
8
9
evam api tenaiva tasya lakṣyamāṇatvāsambhavād yena ta L18r J22v
2
10
11
lakṣyate" tasya karaṇasya karmaṇo 'rthāntaratvāt sa eva doṣaḥ ||
13
247
12
14
-
§94. atha syāt – jñānasya karaṇatvāt tasya ca svalakṣaṇānta-
rbhāvād” ayamadoṣa iti |
15
1
Tib: ci ste yang :: atha ± Q: Ø; J, L: 'naneti
4
tena
3 P : krtyalyutor; Q:
Ø; B: krtyapluto; D: krtyato Q: Ø; B, D, J, L: tena evam; Tib: n.e.
5 Q: Ø; D: āpi
6 Q: Ø; D: tanaiva; PsP1: tenaitasya (i.e.,
without eva and with the following tasya understood as etasya); Tib:
7 Tib: n.e. tasya 8
te nyid kyis
Q: Ø; J, L: laksamana
D: yemana; PsP1: yenaital; Tib: gang gis de Q: Ø; D: lakşate
11 P: ¬; Q: Ø; D: 'rthāntecatvāt 12 P: ⊗; Q: Ø; J, L: athā 13Q: Ø;
9Q: Ø;
10
14
J: karanat Q: Ø; D: na
15 P: svalaksana°; Q: Ø248
CRITICAL EDITION
4
B19r ucyate' – iha bhāvānām anyasādhāraṇam ātmīyaṃ yat sva-
2
●
3
5
rūpam' tat svalakṣaṇam' tadyathā pṛthivyāḥ kāṭhinyam | vedanāyā
6
8
9
3gha:" faşıldı fauci' çífà faşıíîì: àª³ fè dela,
¹ Q: Ø; B, J, L: om., but include in following dittography (see next
note) Tib: re zhig 'dir (*iha tāvat), n.e. bhāvānām. tāvat may have
entered a Skt ms because the upper part of the line was damaged at
this point. bhā would have been mistaken for tā, and the ās of vā and
nā, which may have been written in superscript style, might not have
been visible; n was then read or interpreted as t and the word read as
tāvat. The damage may have led to ma being read as initial a, i.e., as
the initial a of anyāsādhāraṇam. 3Q: Ø; B: anyāsādhāraṇasya (fol-
lowed by a dittography, which was evidently in ms ê, subsequently in
ms λ, and as a result also passed on to mss J and L:) lakṣyamāṇatvāt
sambhavād yena tal lakṣyate || tasya karaṇasya karmaṇo ’rthāntaratvāt
sa eva doṣaḥ || atha syāt jñānasya karaṇatvāt tasya ca svalakṣaṇāntar-
bhāvād ayam adoṣa iti || ucyate || iha bhāvānām; J: as B, ºlakṣyamāṇa-
tvāsam ᵒsvalakṣaṇāntabhāvād ...; L: anyāsādhāraṇasya lakṣamā-
ṇatvā sambhavād yana ta lakṣyate || tasya karaṇasya karmmaṇorthān-
taratvāt sa eva doṣaḥ atha syāt jñānasya karaṇatvāt tasya ca svalakṣa-
ṇāntabhāvād ayam adoṣa iti || ucyate | iha bhāvānām Q: Ø; D: mat
Q: Ø; J: kathinyam; L: ᵒya 6 Q: Ø; B, J: anubhāvā; D, L: anubha-
vā; PsP₁: viṣayānubhavo; Tib: myong ba. P: attests a following yāvad;
pṛthivi has been assumed by P's scribe or an earlier scribe or scholar
to represent the rūpa skandha and yāvat thus to be a necessary inclu-
sion accounting for the lack of reference to the sañjñā and samskāra
skandhas. Note, however, that the samskāra skandha is not assigned a
specific characteristic in the AK, and is described in AK I.15ab mere-
ly as the skandhas different from the other four skandhas. Neither
PSP Tib nor the paper mss attest yāvat, and its loss is difficult to ex-
plain paleographically. 7 Q: Ø; B, J, L: viṣamam; PsP₁: viṣayaprati-
vijñaptiḥ for viṣayam prati vijñaptiḥ; Tib: rnam par shes pa'i yul so
4
5
•
sor rnam par rig pa · viṣayam prati vijñaptiḥ. MA VI.203a: viṣayam
prati vijñaptiḥ. Cp. Li and Steinkellner 2008: 16, n. 7. 8 Q: Ø; D:10
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
2 3
lakṣyata iti kṛtvā| prasiddhyanugatāṃ ca vyutpattim avadhūya karma-
5
6
9
sādhanam abhyupagacchatā vijñānasya ca karaṇabhāvaṃ pratipadyamā-
8
nenedam uktaṃ bhavati – svalakṣaṇasyaiva karmatā svalakṣaṇāntarasya
PsPL61 karaṇabhāvaś ceti | tatra yadi vijñānasvalakṣaṇaṃ karaṇam tasya
5 vyatiriktena karmaṇā bhavitavyamiti sa eva doṣaḥ ||
249
4
18
§95. atha syāt – yat pṛthivyādigataṃ kāṭhinyādikaṃ" vijñāna-
12
13
14
15
16
gamyam | tat tasya karmāsty eva tac" ca svalakṣaṇāvyati-
riktamiti|
10
19
.17
evaṃ tarhi vijñānasvalakṣaṇasya karmatvābhāvāt prameyatvaṃ” na syāt'
karmarūpasyaiva svalakṣaṇasya prameyatvāt | tataś ca dvividhaṃ prameyaṃ J23r
20
tam 9 Q: Ø; B, J, L: tadvāna. Tib: des de mtshon par byed pas ::
tena hi tadvān laksyata iti krtvā; LVP (cf. PsPL 60, n. 6 ) interprets the
reading in his mss to be tena hi tad vā na laksyate and emends on the
basis of Tib to tena hi tal laksyate.
2
8 Q: Ø; D:
7
1 Q: Ø; B: lakseta; D: laksata; J, L: laksete Q: Ø; B, J, L: prasi-
ddhānugatām; PsP₁: prasiddhānugatām; Tib: rab tu grags pa dang rjes
su 'brel pa'i 3 P, Q: Ø; D: va 4 P: 0; Q: Ø; D: vyatpattim
5 P:
¬; Q: Ø; D: kerma° 6 Q: Ø; B: abhyupagacchati; D: atyuyagaccha-
tā; J, L: atyupagacchati; PsPL: abhyupagacchati. See Translation note.
Q: Ø; D: °mānenadam; PsPL: pratipadyamānenety
svalaksamesyaiva; J, L: svalaksanasauva 9 Q: Ø; D: vyatiriktamna
10 Q: Ø; J: °gata
11 Q: Ø; D: kāthanyādikam; J: kāthi°
B: vijñāgamyam, but written correctly in the dittography which fol-
ows; J: vijñānagasyam
13 P, Q: Ø; J, L: tet 14 P, Q: Ø; D: kartāsty
5 P, Q: Ø; D, J, L: ava; Tib: n.e. eva
]
16 P, Q: Ø; D: tec 17 Q: Ø; D:
pramamyatvam Q: Ø; D: °syeva Q: Ø; B, J, L: svalaksana-
dosa, now repeat from beginning of paragraph (B: atha syād yat
karmarūpasyaiva svalaksanasya, J: atha syād yat... karmarūpasyaiva
12 Q: Ø;
18
19250
3
L18v P11v svalakṣaṇaṃ' sāmānyalakṣaṇaṃ cety etad viśeṣya vaktavyam – kiñcit
svalakṣa lakṣyata ityevaṃ vyate| kiñci
9
CRITICAL EDITION
6
10
aprameyaṃ yal lakṣyate 'neneti " vyapadiśyata iti | atha tadapi
karmasādhanam”| tadā tasyānyena karaṇena bhavitavyam jñānā-
13
21
8
18
B19v ntarasya” karaṇabhāvaparikalpanāyām" aniṣṭhādoṣaś” cāpadyate ||
19
§96. atha manyase svasaṃvittir
grahaṇāt karmatāyāṃ satyāmasty eva” prameyāntarbhāva” iti|
22
svalakşalaksanasya; L: atha syād yat
... karmarūpasyaiva svalaksana ( ? )sya)
1 Q: Ø; L: svalaksamānam
3
raty
14
'
7
Q: Ø; D: ityavam
10
20
asti| tataḥ svasaṃvittyā
evam tarhi vijñānasvalakşasya
20 Tib: n.e. ca
± Q: Ø; B: bhavaty; D: rasy; J: laty; L:
Tib: khyad par 'di tsam zhig brjod par bya dgos (*etāvad
viśesanam vaktavyam?) :: etad viśesya vaktavyam 4 Q: Ø; D: tyala-
ksanam 5 Q: Ø; D: pramayam; L: prameyam prameya
6 p: ya(l);
Q: Ø; D: ya
8 Q: Ø; D: vyavapadiśyatam
9
Q: Ø; J, L: kimci Q: Ø; B, J, L: prameyam 11 P: [2](ti); Q: Ø;
D: 'nenaiti
12 P, Q: Ø; D: karmesādhanam
13 P, Q: Ø; L: syānye-
14
na
4 P, Q: Ø; B, J, L: °vya 15 P, Q: Ø; D: jñānanterasya 16 Q:
Ø; D: ᵒparikalpyanāyām 17 P: ⊗, medial i is visible; Q: Ø; B, J, L:
anityādoşaś; em. by LVP: anavasthādoşaś. LVP (PsP1 61, n. 4) reports
that his mss read tadānityādoşa. De Jong (1978: 34) tentatively
suggests anistā doşāś cāpadyante on the basis of D, referring to PsPL
210.6 (correct to 210.16) where Tib attests thug pa med par thal ba'i
phyir for PsP1’s anistadosaprasangāt; mss P and D, however, both
attest anisthādosaprasangāt at their equivalents for PsPL 21016. Cf.
anisthā earlier at PsPM §24. 18 P, Q: Ø; B: copapadyate; D: cāpa-
Q: Ø;
20
21
dyante
D: °yā
19
22
P: ⊗; Q: Ø; J, L: svasavittir Q: Ø; D: tate
Q: Ø; D: ava 23 Q: Ø; D: prameyāntabhāva
5PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
s
5
PsPL62 ucyate – vistareṇa madhyamakāvatāre svasaṃvittiniṣedhāt svalakṣaṇaṃ
5
svalakṣaṇāntareṇa lakṣyate tadapi svasaṃvittyeti na yujyate | api
6
7
ca tadapi nāma jñānaṃ svalakṣaṇavyatirekeṇāsiddham asambhavāla
8
9
lakṣyābhāveṃ nirāśrayalakṣaṇapravṛttyasambhavāt sarvathā nāstīti
11
kutaḥ svasaṃvittiḥ ||
tathā coktamāryaratnacūḍaparipṛcchāyām –
14
sa cittam asamanupaśyaṃś cittadhārāṃ paryeṣate -
12
1
13
251
10
15
kutaḥ svit
1
Q: Ø; J: svasamvrtti° 2P: ⊗; Q: Ø; J: svalaksyanā°; L: °ntarana
3 P, Q: Ø; D: laksanam 4 P, Q: Ø; D: yujyete 5 P, Q: Ø; J: tad api ||
wapi 6Q: Ø; B: °vyatirekenā; D: °siddhyam; J: ° vyatirekenāsi-
ddhem; L: °vyatirakenāsiddhem; PsP1: °vyatirekenāsiddher; *LT:
°vyatirekenāsiddham; Tib: rang gi mtshan nyid las tha dad par ma
grub (la) 7 P: asambhavā(l); Q: Ø; D: °asambhava 8 Q: Ø; D:
°bhavova 9 P Q: Ø; J: sarvvatathā; L: sarvata 10 P, Q: Ø; L: tha-
stīti 11 P, Q: Ø; B, J, L: tatah 12 Em. following LVP: asamanupa-
śyamś. P: samanupaśyan; Q: Ø; B, D, J, L: samanu°; PsP Tib: yang
dag par rjes su ma mthong bas. RCP Tib (P): yang dag par rjes su ma
mthong bas. The sentence also appears at BCAP 392.4, where, unless
LVP has silently emended the passage, asamanupaśyamś represents
the ms reading, and at ŚiS 235.3, where the participle with alpha pri-
vative is likewise attested. 13 Q: Ø; J: cittadhānām 14 Q: Ø; D, L:
paryasate Em.: kutah svit. P: kutaścit; Q: Ø; B, D, J, L: kutaścit.
PsP1: kutaścit. PsP Tib’s sems gang (RCP Tib: ga) las byung zhes sup-
ports the emendation. The corruption to kutaścit may have required
two steps: kutahsvit to kutasvit, the latter then “corrected” to kutaścit;
or possibly only one step: svi of svid was read/ interpreted as sci,
which caused the scribe to view the vigraha as a mistake and thus to
drop it.
15J23v
D10v
252
CRITICAL EDITION
3
4
tasyotpattir iti| tasyaivaṃ bhavati – ālambane sati cittam
-
5
6
7
8
9
utpadyate | tat kim anyad ālambanam anyac cittamatha
10
11
yadevālambanaṃ tadeva cittam | yadi tāvad anya ālambanam
12
13
14
anyac cittam tadā dvicittatā bhaviṣyati | atha yadevā-
15
lambanaṃ tadeva cittam' tat kathaṃ cittaṃ cittaṃ samanupaśyati| na '
16
17
18
ca cittaṃ" cittaṃ samanupaśyati| tadyathāpi nāma tayaivāsidhāra-
1 Em. following LVP: tasyotpattir. P: tasyautpattir; Q: Ø; B, J, L: ta-
syopapattir; D: tasyāpayattir ± Q: Ø; L: tasyaiva. BCAP citation:
3
5
6
sems te : tat
10
13 The
om. tasyaivam bhavati; ŚiS citation attests tasyaivam bhavati 3 Q:
Ø; D: ālasbana 4 PsP Tib: dmigs pa yod pa las : ālambane sati
P: sa(m)utpa[2]; Q: Ø P, Q: Ø; L: tā; Tib: de yang 'di snyam du
7 P, Q: Ø; L: kimm 8 P: [2]banam; Q: Ø; B, J, L:
ārambanam 9 P, Q: Ø; D: anya. SiS citation: om. anyac (and the
following word) cittam. BCAP presents the sentence as: tat kim anyac
cittam anyad ālambanam. PsP and RCP Tib: ci dmigs pa de yang
gzhan la (RCP: |) sems de yang gzhan nam | Q: Ø; L: enyad
11 P: (c)ālambanam; Q: Ø 12 Q: Ø; B, J, L: anya; D: anyā
citations of the passage in ŚiS and BCAP attest tad. PsP Tib: gal te re
zhig (RCP Tib om. re zhig) dmigs pa yang gzhan la sems kyang
gzhan (RCP Tib adds a following yin) na ni sems de gnyis su 'gyur ro
Q: Ø; D: °to 15 Em. with de Jong (1978: 34): cittam. P: c+tt+na;
Q: Ø; D: cittamna; B, J, L: cittena. PsP and RCP Tib: sems kyis sems
de ji lar mthong bar 'gyur. LVP (PsPL 62, n. 6 ) retains the reading
cittena cittam found in his mss, noting, however, that ŚiS 235.6 and
BCAP 393.1 attest cittam cittam.
16 Q: Ø; J: om. ŚiS and BCAP: hi
17 Q: Ø; B: cittena 18 Q:
): Ø; L: citta
14PsPL 63
5
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
253
2
3
4
5
yā saivāsidhārā' na śakyate chettum | na tenaivāṅgulyagreṇa ta
7
8
9
evāṅgulyagraṃ śakyate spraṣṭum | evameva na tenaiva cittena tadeva
11
12
10
cittaṃ śakyaṃ draṣṭum | tasyaivaṃ" yoniśaḥ prayuktasya yā cittasyā-
13
navasthānatānucchedāśāśvatatā na kūṭasthatā nāhetukī na pratyaya - L19r
14
viruddhā na tato nānyato na saiva nānyā tāṃ cittadhārāṃ cittalatāṃ
cittadharmatāṃ cittānavasthitatāṃ" cittāpracāratāṃ cittādṛśyatāṃ "
16
17
18
19
cittāsvalakṣaṇatāṃ tathā jānāti tathā paśyati yathā tathatāṃ B20r
1 Q: Ø; D: sevāsidhārā; J: vāsidhārā 2 Q: Ø; D: nah 3 Q: Ø; B:
chetum; D: chatum. SiS and BCAP present: tadyathā na tayaivāsidhā-
4 Q: Ø; D: tanaiva°; L: tenaivā-
rayā saivāsidhārā śakyate chettum
gulya=rana 5 Q: Ø; D: ted 6 Q: Ø; D: avā°; J: evāmgulyamgram
7
Q: Ø; J: mrastam. SiS and BCAP: sprastum śakyate : śakyate spra-
stum Q: Ø; D: tanaiva
8
9 Q: Ø; L: eva cittena tad eva
10 Q: Ø;
D: drastumh; L: drastu. The sentence appears in Śis as: naiva cittena
tad eva cittam śakyate drastum, and in BCAP as: evam eva tenaiva
cittena tad eva cittam drastum. PsP and RCP Tib: sems de nyid kyis
(RCP adds kyang ) sems de nyid mthong bar mi nus so. The BCAP
citation ends here; the ŚiS citation omits the rest of our text and con-
11
11 Q: Ø; D: tasyavam
12 P: yonisah;
tinues with a later section.
Q: Ø 13 P: °sthātānocchedaśāśvatatā; Q: Ø; B, D: °sthānatānoche-
daśāśvatatā; J: °sthānatāmochedaśāśvatatā; L: °sthānatāmochadaśā-
śvatatā. PsP Tib and RCP Tib: gang sems mi gnas pa | chad pa ma yin
pa | rtag pa ma yin pa | (RCP : om. ) 14 Q: Ø; B, J, L: syaiva; D:
seva 15Q:
Q: Ø; D: °sthitetam 16 P: cittapradhāratām; Q: Ø; D:
cittāmpracāratām; PsP Tib and RCP Tib: sems rgyu ba med pa
17 Q: Ø; L: cittadrśyamtam 18 Em.: cittāsvalaksanatām. P: cittasva-
laksanatām. Q: Ø; B, D, J: cittasvalaksanatām; L: om.; PsP1: cittasva-
laksanatām; Tib: sems kyi rang gi mtshan nyid Q: Ø; B: tathā
19254
CRITICAL EDITION
1 2
3
4
na ca virodhayati | tāṃ ca cittavivekatāṃ tathā prajānāti tathā
5
7
6
paśyati| iyaṃ kulaputraṃ citte cittānupaśyanā smṛtyupa-
sthānamiti||
8
9
tadevaṃ nāsti svasaṃvittiḥ | tadabhāvāt kiṃ kena lakṣyate ||
10
13
§97. kiṃ ca bhedena vā tal" lakṣaṇaṃ" lakṣyāt " syādabhedena vā |
5
15
17
tatra yadi tāvad" bhedena | tadā lakṣyā bhinnatvād " alakṣaṇaval
16
1 P: ca; Q: Ø 2 P: na; Q: Ø; L: vi 3 Q: Ø; B, J, L: nirodhayati; PsP
Tib: 'khrug par mi byed pa; RCP Tib: 'khrugs par mi byed pa. De
Jong (1978: 34) suggests that Tib may be translating vilodayati; he
refers to BHSD entry virolayati (“stirs, agitates'); LC (referring to
Mvy 5339) gives dkrugs pa and bsrubs pa as translation equivalents
for virolitah. 4 Q: Ø; PsP Tib and RCP Tib: de bzhin nyid ji lta ba
de bzhin du sems de dag dben pa nyid du rab tu shes | de bzhin du
mthong ba : tām ca cittavivekatām tathā prajānāti tathā paśyati. The
*yathā tathatām on which RCP Tib's de bzhin nyid ji lta ba is based
(PsP Tib has been copied from RCP Tib) may have been a later add-
ition (i.e., the phrase had not entered our ms tradition but had already
been brought into the ms used for the RCP translation ). The meaning
of yathā tathatām could be seen as carrying over from PsP Skt’s pre-
5 Q: Ø; conj. by LVP: kulaputra [bodhisattvasya];
PsP Tib and RCP Tib: rigs kyi bu byang chub sems pa'i. I suspect that
bodhisattvasya represents a later addition, i.e., one that had not enter-
ed our manuscript tradition but was already in the ms used for RCP
Tib. PsP Tib: sems la sems kyi rjes su lta bai dran pa nye bar
gzhag pa’i spyod pa yongs su dag pa'o zhes gsungs so : citte cittānu-
paśyanā smrtyupasthānam iti. LVP (PsP1 63, n. 7) reconstructs °smr-
tyupasthānacaryā pariśuddhā. 7 Q: Ø; J: °paśyatana
8 Q: Ø; D:
svayamvittis 9Q: Ø; B, D, J, L: laksate Q: Ø; D: na
11 Q: Ø;
D: ta 12 P: laksyanam; Q: Ø; D: lakaksanam 13Q: Ø; D: lakyata
14 Q: Ø; L: tāva
vious sentence.
6
10
,
15
Q: Ø; L: hedena 16 Q: Ø; L: laksyā 17Q: Ø;10
2
3
lakṣaṇamapi na tallakṣaṇam' | lakṣaṇāc ca bhinnatvādalakṣyaval
5
6
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
PsPL 64 lakṣyamapi na lakṣyam | tathā lakṣyād bhinnatvāl lakṣaṇasya lakṣaṇa-
8
10
11
nirapekṣaṃ lakṣyaṃ syāt' tataś ca na” tal lakṣyaṃ" lakṣaṇanirapekṣatvāt
12
13
18
bhāvam ||
khapuṣpavat| athābhanne lakṣya tadā lakṣaṇādadvyatirikta-
14
5 bālū lakṣaṇasvātmavad vihīyate lakṣyasya lakṣyatā | lakṣyāc
16
17
cāvyatiriktatvāl lakṣyasvātmaval lakṣaṇamapi na lakṣaṇasva-
19
yathā coktam" -
20
|
lakṣyā
alakṣaṇam |
26
tayorabhāvo 'nyatve viṣpaṣṭaṃ kathitaṃ tvayā ||
27
255
21
22
23
25
lakṣaṇam anyac cet syāt lakṣ
L: hinnatvād
1
Q: Ø; D: talaksana 2 Q: Ø; D: om. 3 Q: Ø; D: va
°va 5 Q: Ø; L: laksyā 6 Q: Ø; D: bhanatvā; L: hinnatvāl
4
24
J: laksyanasya 8 P: °nirapeksyam; Q: Ø; J:
L: laksyananirapeksyam
9 Q: Ø; D: laksam
na
12 Q: Ø; D:
15 Q: Ø; D: °yā
11
Q: Ø; D: laksam; L: om.
laksane Q: Ø; D: °tvā
14
15
laksyamnanirapeksam;
10
° Q: Ø; D: na taś ca
°bhinna
13 Q: Ø; J:
16 Q: Ø; D, L: °tvā
17
18
19
Q: Ø; D: °va P: ksanasvabhāvam; Q: Ø
P: yathoktam; Q:
20 P: lakṣyā; Q: Ø; D: lakṣā 21 Q: Ø; D: anya
22 Q: Ø; D:
24
25 Q: Ø; B, J, L:
Ø
ceda 23
Q: Ø; B: syāl Q: Ø; B: om.; D: ta
laksanam Q: Ø; B: alaksanam tat 27Q: Ø; B, J, L: 'nyatve;
conj. by LVP: '[na]nyatve
26
4Q: Ø; D:
Q: Ø;256
2
3
P12 iti| na ca vinā tattvānyatvena lakṣyalakṣaṇasiddhāv anya gatir
asti ||
4
tathā ca vakṣyati -
CRITICAL EDITION
5
6
7
ekībhāvena vā siddhir nānābhāvena vā yayoḥ |
na vidyate tayoḥ siddhiḥ kathaṃ nu khalu vidyate ||
8
9
iti ||
10
11
§98. athāvācyatayā siddhir" bhaviṣyatīti cet |
naitadevam| avācyatā hi nāma parasparavibhāgaparijñānābhāve” sati
13
14
bhavati| yatra ca vibhāgaparijñānaṃ nāsti' tatredaṃ lakṣaṇam idaṃ
15
16
L19v lakṣyam” iti viśeṣataḥ paricchedāsambhave sati dvayor" apy 10
17
abhāva eveti| tasmādavācyatayāpi nāsti siddhiḥ ||
4 Q: Ø; D: ce
1 P: tattvonyatvena; Q: Ø; J: tattvānvetvena; L: tattvānvatvena
laksyaksanasiddhāv; Q: Ø
3 Q: Ø; D: gativ
Ø; J: ekībhāve 6 Q: Ø; D: siddhin
7
Q: Ø; D: ninābhāvena
na; Q: Ø; B, J, L: na; conj. by LVP: [nu]. P for PsP's citation of MMK
II.21 (PsPL 105.7-8): na; P also attests na in PsP's subsequent citation
of II.21cd (PsPL 105.10); D for PsP's citation of MMK II.21: nu; D
also attests nu in PsP's subsequent citation of II.21cd; B for PsP's
citation of MMK II.21: nu; B attests na in PsP's subsequent citation
of II.21cd. Tib: de gnyis grub pa ji ltar yod 9 Q: Ø; L: itih
10 Q:
Ø; B, D, J, L: athāvācyateyā; PsP1: atha vocyate [avācyata]yā; Tib: ci
ste brjod du med pa nyid du Q: Ø; J: siddhi Q: Ø; D: °va
11
12
13
15 Q: Ø; L: om.
Q: Ø; D: tatradam
14 Q: Ø; L: om. idam
16
Q: Ø; D: dgayor 17 Q: Ø; D: ebhāva
2 P:
5 Q:
5
8P:5
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
c2
599. api ca yadi jñānaṃ karaṇaṃ viṣayasya paricchede kaḥ kartā | na
3
4
PsPL65 ca kartāramantareṇāsti karaṇādīnāṃ sambhavaḥ | chidikriyāyām
8
257
12
13
14
tatrārthadṛṣṭir vijñānaṃ tadviśeṣe tu caitasāḥ ||
B20v
6
iva| arthaṃ cittasya tatra kartṛtvaṃ parikalpyate tadapi na yuktaṃ J24v
9
10
11
yasmād arthamātradarśane cittasya vyāpāro 'rthaviśeṣe caitasānām'
.
5
15
ity abhyupagamāt | ekasyāṃ hi pradhānakriyāyāṃ" sādhyāyāṃ
yathāsvaṃ guṇakriyānirvṛttidvāreṇāṅgībhāvopagamāt karaṇādīnāṃ kara-
18
17
2
3
1 P: vijñānam; Q: Ø
± Q: Ø; D: kattām; J: katta
³P: om. (a ca is,
however, written in the margin as a correction to be added to P’s
text); Q: Ø 4 Q: Ø; B, J, L: sambheda; D: sambheva
°kriyām; Tib: gcod pa'i bya ba bzhin 6 Q: Ø; D: athāpa
tvam; Q: ø
5 Q: 0; D:
7 p: katr-
9
8 Q: Ø; B, J, L: parikalpate Tib: 'di ltar :: yasmāt
10
11
Q: Ø; B, J, L: arthamātradarthane; D: arthane; PsP1: arthamātradar-
śanam; Tib: don tsam Ita ba ni sems kyi bya ba yin la. The translators
may have thought that darśana is, strictly speaking, the vyāpāra.
Q: Ø; D: °viśesā; J, L: °viśeso; conj. by LVP: 'rthaviśeşa[darśa-
nam]; Tib: don gyi khyad par Ita ba ni sems las byung ba rnams kyi
bya ba yin te; Tib supplies what has been elided in Skt
12 Em. fol-
lowing LVP and MAV: tatrārthadrstir. P : tatrārthadrsti; Q: Ø; B, D, J,
L: tatrārthadrsti
Q: Ø; D: caitasyā
14
13 Q: Ø; J: tadvisese
15
Q: Ø; D: atyupagamāt; L: utyupagamāt
16 Q: Ø; J: pradhāṇaº
17
Q: Ø; D: om. P: gunapradhanabhāvenangībhāvopagamāt syāt;
Q: Ø; B, J, L: °bhāvopagamanāt; D: °nirvrtidvārenāmgābhāvopaga-
manāt. The text of P has obviously been tampered with, the first com-
pound having been changed to a dvandva in instrumental abstract: “as
subsidiary [action] and principal [activity].” PsP Tib: ji lta bu’i bya ba
phal pa sgrub pa’i sgo nas . yan lag gi ngo bor gyur pa las. De Jong
(1978: 34) views D’s °āmgābhāvopagamanāt as supported by Tib's
yan lag gi ngo bor gyur pa las and emends to °āngabhāvopagamanāt;258
1
2
3
ṇāditvam | na cehajñānavijñāna ekā pradhānakriyā| kiṃ ta |
6
arthamātraparicchittir vijñānasya' pradhānakriyā | jñānasya tvarthaviśe-
8
ṣapariccheda iti nāsti jñānasya karaṇatvam nāpi cittasya kartṛtvam'
10
tataś ca sa eva doṣaḥ ||
CRITICAL EDITION
$100. atha" syāt anātmānaḥ sarvadharmā ityāgamāt kartuḥ
sarvathābhāvāt” kartāramantareṇāpi vidyata eva kriyādivyavahāra
13
14
iti |
.
etadapi nāsti
17
D11r coktaṃ madhyamakāvatāre||
15
16
āgamasya samyagarthānavadhāraṇāt | etac
I assume that P and the other mss preserve the correct reading (D’s ā
more likely represents the vertical stroke for ī than an intrusion), and
that Tib reflects the translators' mistake or interpretation (or Q's
reading). The doubly expressed “becoming” in °āñgībhāvopagamāt
may be for the sake of emphasis.
1 D: karanādatvam 2 Q: Ø; D: °yar 3 Q: Ø; J: tahy 4 Q: Ø; B:
atha...chitti; J, L: °chitti 5 P: jñānasya; Q: Ø; B: vijñānatva. The
text of P has been tampered with and vijñānasya switched with the
following jñānasya, a change possibly influenced by the order of the
components of the preceding dvandva jñānavijñānayoh.
pradhāna 7 P: vijñānasya; Q: Ø; D: sya. See two notes earlier. Tib
expands with shes pa'i gtso bor gyur pa'i bya ba. 8 P: vijñānasya;
Q: Ø. The previous switch in P of vijñānasya and jñānasya demands
that vijñāna be understood here as synonymous with the instrument
caitta/caitasa. Q: Ø; D: nu(?)pi
10 Tib n.e. ca
11 Q: |
Q: Ø; D:
12 2 Q: Ø; B, D: sarvathā | abhāvāt; J: sarvathā (end of line) a-
13 B: iti
bhāvāt; L: sarvathā || abhāvāt
` Q: Ø; B: eva Q: Ø;
D: samāgarthā° Q: Ø; D: eted; PsPL: etad Q: Ø; B: api cok-
tam; D: yoktam; J, L: acoktam; PsP1: evoktam; Tib: 'di yang ... bstan
6 Q: Ø; D:
9
atha
14
15
16
17
5
PsPL 665
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
259
2
§101. athāpi syāt – yathā śilāputrakasya' śarīraṃ rāhoḥ śira
3
4
iti śarīraśirovyatiriktaviśeṣaṇāsambhave 'pi viśeṣaṇaviśeṣya-
5
6
bhāvo 'sti' evaṃ pṛthivyāḥ svalakṣaṇamiti svalakṣaṇavyatirikta-
pṛthivyasambhave' 'pi bhaviṣyatīti|
7
0
8
naitadevamatulyatvāt| śarīraśiraḥśabdayor hi buddhyādipāṇyādivat
10
11
sahabhāvipadārthāntarasāpekṣatāpravṛttau śarīraśiraḥśabdamātrālambana-
buddhyupajananeṃ janaḥ” sahacāripadārthāntarasākāṅkṣa eva vartate
kasya śarīraṃ kasya śira iti | itaro 'pi viśeṣaṇāntarasambandha
zin
7
8
1 Q: Ø; B: śirā°; L: Śibhāputra° ± Q: Ø; D: rāhāh 3 Q: Ø; B, D, J:
°viśesenā° 4 Q: Ø; Dsi 5Q: Ø; D: viśesaneviśesahāvo 6Q: Ø;
D: avam
Tib with la sogs pa after sa, appearing to have read °pr-
thivyādyasambhave Em. following LVP: buddhyādipāṇyādivat. P:
[2]dipānyādimat; Q: Ø; B, D, J, L: °ādimat. Tib: blo dang lag pa la
sogs pa ltar
9 Em.: °mātrālambanabuddhyupajanane. P: °mātrā-
lambano buddhyupajananah; Q: Ø; B, J: °mātrālambano buddhyupa-
jananah; D: °mātrālambano 'buddhyāpajanamah; L: °mātrālambano
buddhyāpajananah; PsP1: °mātrālambano buddhyupajananah; Tib:
lus dang mgo’i sgra tsam la dmigs pa'i blo skyes pa lta zhig. The
emendation °ālambanabuddhy° is suggested by Tib’s dmigs pa'i blo;
P, B and J’s reading are rejected because it is unusual to have ālam-
bana, normally the attribute of a mental act, taken in reference to a
person. Tib’s lta zhig is, however, difficult to understand; LVP pro-
poses an equivalence to 'ga zhig and la la zhig. My emendation of the
mss' text assumes an eyeskip from na of upajanane to na of janah
which caused the dropping of °ne ja°.
10
Em.: janah. P: om. janah;
Q: Ø; B, D, J, L: om. janah; PsP1: om. janah 11 P: °kānksā; Q: Ø; D:
sahavyari °
J25r L20r260
1
B21r nirācikīrṣayā śilāputrakarāhuviśeṣaṇadhvaninā laukikasaṅketānu-
vidhāyinā pratipattuḥ॰ kāṅkṣām upahantīti yuktam | iha tu kāṭhinyā-
5
divyatiriktapṛthivyādyasambhaveṃ sati na yukto viśeṣaṇaviśeṣyabhāvaḥ||
9
CRITICAL EDITION
§102. tīrthikair॰ vyatiriktalakṣyābhyupagamāt tadanurodhena viśeṣa-
Q1r ṇābhidhānam aduṣṭamiti cet |
10
13
2
|
naitadevam"| na hi tīrthikaparikalpitā yuktividhurāḥ padārthāḥ sva-
14
samaye 'bhyupagantuṃ nyāyyāḥ pramāṇāntarāder apy" abhyupagama-
prasaṅgāt |
15
16
12
8
§103. api ca pudgalādiprajñaptivat svaśarīropādānasya śilāputra-
P12v kasyopādātur laukikavyavahārāṅgabhūtasya viśeṣaṇasyāvicāra- 10
18
19
17
1
Q: Ø; B: viśesanānamtarasabandha°; J, L: viśesanāntarasabandha°;
D: °nirāvakīrsayā. PsP1: viśesanānantarasambandha° Stcherbatsky
(1927: 150, n. 4) corrects to viśeşanāntarasambandha; he also
emends khyad par gzhag as found in Tib P, N and G (see PsPL 66, n.
4) to the correct reading khyad par gzhan ( attested in D and C).
± P: ⊗; Q: Ø; B, J, L: śirā°; D: Śiloputrakalāhu° 3 P, Q: Ø; D: prati-
patuh; J: pratikartuh; L: pratiparttuh; PsP1: pratikartuh; Tib: rtogs pa
po'i 4 P, Q: Ø; LVP: apahantīti; Tib: sel bar byed do zhes
5 Q: Ø;
L: °vyatiriktamprthi° 6 Q: Ø; J: tīrthikai 7Q: Ø; D: vyatiriktala-
ksyātyupamāt; B, J: vyatiriktālaksyā°; L: vyatiriktālaksyātyupagamāt
8
' Q: Ø; D: tadanurādhena 9 Q again available as a witness
na ce+; D: nen; J: yat; L: pren 11 P: Ø; J: aivah
dang 'gal ba dag (yuktiviruddhāh?) :: yuktividhurāh
tyupagantum; D: 'tyupagantum; L: tyupagantam
Q: om.; Tib:
16 P: Ø;
n.e. api 15 P: Ø; B, L: atyupa°; D: atyupagamaprasangāh
B, D, J, L: pumgaladi°
17 Tib: n.e. sva. PsP1: saśarīro°. LVP (cf.
PsPL 67, n. 3) finds sa ° and sva° his manuscripts. 18 P: (Śi)[1]-
14
10 P:
12 Tib: rigs pa
13 P: Ø; B:
PsPL 675
10
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
2
3 4
5
prasiddhasya sadbhāvāt śiropādānasya ca rāhor upādātuḥ sadbhā-
6
vād ayuktam etan nidarśanam ||
§104. śarīraśirovyatiriktasyārthāntarasyāsiddhes tanmātrasyopa-
lambhāt siddhameva nidarśanamiti cet |
8
17
10
11
naitad evam"' laukike" vyavahāra itthaṃ vicārāpravṛtter avi-
7
15
16
cārataś” ca laukikapadārthānāmastitvāt | yathaiva hi" rūpādivya-
18
tirekeṇa vicāryamāṇa ātmā na sambhavati api ca lokasaṃvṛtyā J25v
.
261
16 Tib: n.e. hi
13
skandhānupādāyāsyāstitvam evaṃ rāhuśilāputrakayor apīti
20
nāsti nidarśanasiddhiḥ | evaṃ pṛthivyādīnāṃ yadyapi kāṭhinyādivya-
21
22
24
tiriktaṃ vicāryamāṇaṃ lakṣyaṃ nāsti lakṣyavyatireca lakṣaṇaṃ
19 B, L: °Śirā°
19
23
+(u)+raka(syo)pādātu+; B, J, L: śilāputrakasyapādātu; D: śilāputraka-
syāpādātu; PsP1: silaputrakasy[o]pādatur
19 J: lauki || kavyavarām-
ga°; L: lauki | kavya°
Q: °āvicāramprasiddhasya; B, J, L: °syā
pādānasya; J: upānasya 4 D: pa; L: va
B, J, L: ayoktam; D: amektam
8P: Ø; B, J: °syoparambhāt; L: °syāparambhāt
11 P: Ø; Q: eva; D: eyam
10
°P: Ø; D: naivad
12 Q: laukika; note
the later laukike vyavahāre (PsPM §105 reply) as well as laukiko vyav-
13 J vicārāprvrtter
14 B: avivāratas
ahārah (same reply).
15 Tib: n.e. eva
18
D:
°kana
na
Q: kathinya°; D: °vyaitiriktam
24 J: laksyanam
22 p: Ø; D: °na
2 L: sahāvāt
3 D: dra-
5 L: nāhor 6 p: a(yu)[2];
7P: ¬; B, J, L: °vyatiritasvārthā
9 P: Ø; D: ce
17 P: Ø; B, L: °kena; D: °keśa; J:
21 P: Ø;
20 D: darśanasiddhih
23 B, J, L: °kena262
B21v
1
3
L20v nirāśrayam' tathāpi saṃvṛtir eṣeti' parasparāpekṣāmāyā siyā
CRITICAL EDITION
5
7
siddhiṃ vyavasthāpayāṃ babhūvur ācāryāḥ | avaśyaṃ caitad evam
9
10
2
8
11
abhyupeyam | anyathā hi saṃvṛtir upapattyā na viyujyeta | PsPL68
12
15
13
14
tadeyaṃ tattvam eva" syāt | na saṃvṛtiḥ| na copapattyā vicārya-
20
17
18
19
māṇānāṃ" śilāputrakādīnām " evāsambhavaḥ | kiṃ tarhi| vakṣya- s
21
22
māyā yuktyarūpavedanādīnām api nāsti sambhava iti
23
24
25
teṣām api saṃvṛtyā śilāputrakādivan nāstitvam āstheyaṃ
®
13 B, J: evam
2 B:
1B, J, L: eveti; Tib: 'di ni kun rdzob tu yod :: samvrtir esā
pararasparāpekṣayātrayo; J, L: parasparāpekṣayātrayo; D: parasparā-
meksyamātrayo; PsP1: parasparāpeksayā tayoh; Tib: phan tshun ltos
pa tsam gyis. LVP (PsPL 67, n. 7 ) considers Tib's ltos pa tsam gyis to
represent apeksāmātrena. De Jong (1978: 35) emends to parasparā-
peksāmātratayā claiming that D reads parasparāmeksyamātratayā;
he has, however, misread D's ° mātrayo as °mātratayā.
3 Tib: phan
tshun Itos patsam gyis grub pa'i sgo nas :: parasparāpeksāmātrayā
siddhyā 4 P: ⊗; B: °yā; J, L: vyavasthāyayām
5 D: babhūpur; J:
babhūvūr; L: babhūvun 6 Q: avaśya 7 Tib: n.e. ca 8 D, L: atyu°
9 L: samvrti
10 L: om. upapattyā na viyujyeta | tadeyam tattvam eva
syāt, na samvrtih | 11 P: viyujyet; Q: viyujyate; B, D, J: viyujyet.
Tib: de lta ma yin na kun rdzob 'thad pa dang ldan pa ma yin nam ::
anyathā hi samvrtir upapattyā na viyujyeta 12 P: tadā; B, D, J: tade-
vam; PsPL: tad eva; Tib: des na 'di
15 D: cāpapatyā; L: cāpapattyā; Tib: n.e. ca
14 J: syātan
śānām
18
17 P: [1].(ā)putrạkādīnām; B, J: śirā°; L: śirāputrakādīnā-
8 P: ⊗; D: avā° 19 P: (kin); D: kīm 20 P: ⊗; D: vaksya-
22 L: °vedanidinām
≈yām
23 J: tasām
masaya
21 P: Ø; L: yukatyā
25 P:
24 P: śilāputrasyevā (ā sandhi with following astitvam); B, D, J, L:
śilāpūtraka iva; LVP finds silāputraka iva in his mss and conjectures,
on the basis of Tib's mchi gu la sogs pa, śilāputrak[ādivan].
astitvam; B, D, J, L: astitvam; LVP, reading astitvam in his mss, con-
16 P: ⊗; L: vicāryamā-PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
3
syāt| na caitadevam' ity etat ||
263
4
5
6
§105. atha syāt – kimanayā sūkṣmekṣikayā | naiva hi vayaṃ sarvam
7
9
a pramāṇaprameyavyavahāraṃ satyamity ācakṣmahe | kiṃ tu loka-
10
prasiddhir eṣāmunā nyāyena vyavasthāpyata iti|
12
11
13
5
s ucyate – vayamapyevaṃ brumaḥ kim anayā sūkṣmekṣika laka
14
15
vyavahāre 'vatārikayā | tiṣṭhatu tāvadeṣā viparyāsamātrāsāditā-
tmabhāvasattākā॰ saṃvṛtir" mumukṣūṇāṃ
18
PsPL69
mokṣāvāhakakuśalamūlopa-
jectures nāstitvam on the basis of Tib P : de dag kyang mchi gu
sogs pa bzhin du kun rdzob tu yod pa ma yin pa nyid du khas blangs
par ’gyur na (D, C: °yod pa yin pa nyid°).
1
2 D: amsad 3 Q: etat |
Q: caivam :: caitad evam; Tib: n.e. etat
esā copādāyaprajñaptivyavasthā vistarena madhyamakāvatāre vihiteti
tata eva paryanvesyā; Tib: brten nas brtags par rnam par gzhag pa 'di
yang dbu ma la 'jug pa las rgyas par bstan pas de nyid las yongs su
btsal bar bya’o (cf. PsP1 68, n. 4). This extra sentence represents yet
another interpolated reference to the MA. See Translation note.
4 B, J, L: śūkṣme°; D: śūkṣmekṣikamā 5 D: nanaiva 6 Q: sarva;
7
B, J, L: sarvata Q: om.; B, J, L: om.; D: anum; PsPL: sarvaprama-
na° (i.e., om. amum; sarva conjoined with the following compound);
Tib: n.e. amum 8 B, J, L: apramāṇaprameyavyavahāram (B, J and
L’s ta of sarvata followed by initial a are probably the results of an
early misreading of the aksaras ma and mu of sarvam amum) 9 B:
āvaksyahe; J: ācaksyahe 10 D: lakapramiddhir 11 L: kimm
12 B: Śu°; D: sūksametikayā; J: śūksmeksikasā 13 Q: laukika; D:
laukikam(?)vya°; PsP1: laukika (compounded with following word)
14 D: 'vatācitayā
15 D: tistantu 16 J: °sattā; L: °mātrāsādityatma°
17 J: savrttir; L: samvrtti
18
8 P: mumukṣānām; B: mumūkṣūmmām;
L: mumūksūnāmJ26r
D11v
264
CRITICAL EDITION
2
3
4 5
6
cayahetur' yāvanna tattvādhigama iti | bhavāṃsa v enāṃ saṃvṛti-
paramārthasatyavibhāgadurvidagdhabuddhitā' kvacid upapattim' avatāryā -
nyāyato nāśayati| so 'haṃ saṃvṛtisatyavyavasthāvaicakṣaṇyāl lau-
9
10
kika eva pakṣe sthitvā saṃvṛtyekadeśanirākaraṇopakṣiptopapattyantarā-
12
13
14
ntaram" upapattyantareṇa vinivartayan lokavṛddha iva lokācārāt 5
17
paribhraśyamānaṃ” bhavantam" eva nivartayāmi no" tu saṃvṛtim |
.
18
19
tasmād yadi laukiko vyavahāraḥ | tadāvaśyaṃ lakṣaṇaval" lakṣye-
21
22
23
24
Q11v ṇāpi bhavitavyam | tataś ca sa eva doṣaḥ | atha paramārthaḥ
20
|
2
3
1 B, L: moksovāhaka°; D: māksā...mūlāpacamahetur; J: moksogaha-
ka° B: om.
B, J: tattvāvigama; D: tatvāvigama; L: tattvādiga-
ma 4 Q: ucyate bhavāms; J: bhavās
5 L: t 6 D: esām; J: anām;
PsPL: etām; Tib: de
7Q: samvrttimpara°; D: °paramārtha | satya-
8 D:
•
vi°; Tib: n.e. vibhāga; mi mkhas pas : durvidagdhabuddhitayā
usapattita 9 B: savrti...vaicaksyanyāl; D: °vaicaksyanyā; J: °vaica-
ksyanyāl; L: samvrtisatyavāvasthāvaicaksyānyāl
10 D: lokika
11 Em. following LVP: samvrtyekadeśanirakaranopaksiptopapatty-
antarāntaram. P : samvrtyekadeśanirākaranopaksiptopapatyantarena
(= eyeskip to following compound); Q: °ksiptopattya°; B: samvrttye-
kadaśa°; D: samvrttekadaśanirākaranopaksiptāpayatyantarāntaram; J:
samvrttekadaśa°; L: samvrttekadaśavirākano°; Tib: thad pa gzhan :
[u]papattyantarāntaram 12 p: see previous note
13 Q: nivarttayan
14 PsP1: loka[m]vrddha, but PsP1 599: lokavrddha.
15 Em. follow-
17 D:
ing LVP: paribhraśya°; P: °bhrasāmānam; Q: paribhrasya°; B, J, L:
paribhrasya°; D: parigrasya° 16 B, J, L: bhavatum; D: tum
20 D: laksava 21 B, J, L: laksa-
24 D: dāsat
nā
23 Tib: n.e. ca
18 D: tasyad 19 D: lokikā
nāpi; D: laksyanapi 22 D: tabhaśPRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
3
4
tadā lakṣyābhāvāl’ lakṣaṇadvayam api nāstīti kutaḥ pramāṇa-
dvayam ||
8
ttir nāṅgīkriyate |
5
7
§106. artha' – śabdānām evaṃ kriyākārasambandhapūrvakā vyutpa
265
10
11
5
s tadidam atikaṣṭam | tair eva kriyākārakasambandhapravṛttaiḥ śabdair
17
aho batecchāmātrapratibaddhapravṛttitā bhavataḥ ||
12
13
15
bhavān " vyavaharati śabdārthaṃ " kriyākaraṇādikaṃ " ca necchatīti|
16
18
§107 . yadā caivaṃ prameyadvayamavyavasthitam tadā sāmānyalakṣaṇā-
viṣayatvenāgamāder nāpramāṇāntaratvam ||
19
20
1 D: °vā
2 P: lakṣaṇadvayasya (sandhi with following api; see next
note); D: laksanadvaram 3 P: api utpattir. P's variant reading laksa-
ņadvayasyāpi utpattir would seem to be the result of interference; the
arising of laksanas has not been part of the discussion. Tib: mtshan
nyid gnyis kyang med pas · lakṣaṇadvayam api nāstīti
4 D: kutah
D: atham 6 Q: eva
7 B: °sabandha°; J: kriyākarakasabandhapū-
vikā; L: kriyākārakasabapūrvika 8 D: °tti 9 J: °krīyate
13 P: bhāvan
19
| kastam; D: atikatham; Tib: shin tu dka' :: atikastam
12 B, L: °sabandha°
14 B, D, J, L: °rtha
kriyāmkara° 16 B, J, L: °pravrttito; D catechāyātrapratibaddhapra-
vrttitā; PsPL: °pravrttito. Stcherbatsky (1927: 156, n. 1) and de Jong
(1978: 35) also emend to pravrttita. 17 D: bhavatah | pravrttita bha-
vatah
18 J: caiva; Tib: n.e. ca Em.: sāmānyalaksanāvisayatve-
nāgamāder. P: sāmānyalaksanavisaya °; Q: sāmānyalaksanavisayatve-
nāgader; B, J, L: sāmānyalakṣaṇaviṣayatvenāgamādī; D: sāmānyala-
ksanavisaya°. Tib: lung la sogs pa rang dang spyii mtshan nyid kyi
yul can ma yin pa nyid kyi sgo nas. Em. by LVP: [sva]sāmānyalakṣa-
nāvişayatvenāgamādīnām (final superscript r of °āgamāder has been
read in the later mss as an anusvāra and has thus been interpreted as
10Q: iti
11 D: aca
15 L:
L21r
B22r266
CRITICAL EDITION
P13r §108. kiṃ ca ghaṭaḥ pratyakṣa ityevamādikasya laukikavyavahārasyā-
saṅgrahād' anāryavyavahārābhyupagamāc cāvyāpitā lakṣaṇasyeti na
yuktam etat ||
4
2
19
vyapadiśyate ||
5
J26v §109. atha syāt – ghaṭopādānanīlādayaḥ॰ pratyakṣāḥ pratyakṣapramāṇa-
paricchedyatvāt| tataś ca yathaiva kāraṇe kāryopacāraṃ kṛtvā
7
8
9
10
11
12
14
13
.
buddha" iti vyapadiśyate evaṃ pratyakṣanīlādi-
15
16
18
nimittako ” 'pi ghaṭaḥ " kārye" kāraṇopacāraṃ kṛtvā pratyakṣa iti
belonging to the aksara nā of the next word). LVP conjectures
[sva]sāmānya° on the basis of Tib's rang dang spyi i. See Translation
20 L: °tve; PsPL: pramānāntaratvam; Tib: tshad ma gzhan
nyid ma yin pa ma yin. LVP (PsPL 69, n. 3) notes the discrepancy
between his text and Tib. See previous note.
note.
1 D: lokikavyavahārasyāsamgrahārasyāsamgrahād 2 Em. following
LVP: anārya°. P, Q: ārya°; B, L: āryavyavahārātyagamāc; D: yayam-
vyavahāratyugamā; J: āryavyavahārābhyagamāc; Tib: 'phag pa ma
yin pa’i 3 B, J, L: laksanasveti 4 D: muktam 5P: gatopādānam
nīlādayah; B, J, L: ghatopādānam nī; D: ghatopādānam nīlodayah
6 P: °paricchedatvat
7 D: tataśa 8 D: om.; Tib: n.e. ca
9 Q:
yathaiva sopacāras tathā ca; B: yathai; D: yathiva; Tib: n.e. iva and
n.e. (Q's) sopacāras tathā ca 10 D: kāryāpacāram
11 D: om.
13 P: sukham. P attests
asukha and sukha in the instances
12
D: om.
that follow.
17 P: kārane; B,
14 B, J, L: utpādaya 15 B, J, L: pratyaksanītvādi°; D:
°nīlādigimittaka 16 B, J, L: ghatāh; D: ghatātāh;
D, J, L: kārya; Tib: 'bras bu la 18 P: kāryopacāram. This and the
previous variant in P obviously represent two more cases of deliber-
ate change. 19 B, J, L: vyavadiśyate; D: vyapadiśyate, then repeats
from previous evam to vyapadisyate
PsPL 70
5PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
2
naivaṃvidhe viṣaya upacāro yuktaḥ | utpādoṃ hi loke sukhavyatireke-
3
ṇopalabdhaḥ| sa ca saṃskṛtalakṣaṇasvabhāvatvādanekaduṣkaraśatahetutvād
7
asukha eva| sa sukha' iti vyapadiśyamāno 'sambaddha evety evaṃ-
9
10
vidhe' viṣaye yukta upacāraḥ || ghaṭaḥ pratyakṣa ity atra tu na hi ghaṭo
12
16
267
6
11
5
s nāma yo " 'pratyakṣaḥ pṛthagupalabdho yasyopacārāt" pratyakṣatvaṃ
syāt ||
§110. nīlādivyatiriktasya ghaṭasyābhāvād aupacārikaṃ pratyakṣa-
15
tvamiti cet |
4
evam api
18
10 bhāvāt | na hi kharaviṣāṇe taikṣṇyam upacaryate ||
19
14
sutarāmupacāro” na yukta upacaryamāṇasyāśrayasyā-
20
1
4
2 B, J, L: utpādā 3
D: mukta
D: va
PsP Tib: ’dus byas kyi
mtshan nyid kyi rang bzhin yin pati phyir dang dka' ba brgya phrag
du ma’i rgyu can yin pa’i phyir : samskrtalaksanasvabhāvatvād ane-
kaduşkaraśatahetutvāt; see Translation note. 5 D: sukha eva samu-
kha 6 Q: vyavadiśyamāno
7 D: evaty
8 B: aivamvidher; D:
evavidhe; J: aivamvidhe; PsP1: evamvisaye for evamvidhe visaye
9 B, D, J, L: ghatah
10 D: itity 11 A-N: kaścid yo; Tib: n.e. kaścit,
n.e. yah (gang zhig reflects yasya); PsP1: kaścid yo. I assume that
kaścit is an idiomatic later addition. Tib ( for the sentence): bum pa
mngon sum zhes bya ba 'dir ni gang zhig btags nas mngon sum nyid
du ’gyur ba bum pa zhes bya ba mngon sum ma yin pa logs shig tu
dmigs pa yang ma yin no 12 B, J: °dhā; D: °dhām; L: upabdhā
14 L: aupacarikam
17 D: °rā 18 D: upacayammānena-
1³ D: yasyāvacārāt va; J, L: yasyāpacārāt
15 D: cat; L: cod
16 D: ayi
syā° D: kharavisvāne; PsP1: kharavisāna (compounded with
taiksnyam); Tib: bong bu’i rwa la 20 B: tairvaksvam; D: taiksam; J:
taircaksvam; L: tairveksvam
19268
1
2
L21v §111. api ca lokavyavahārāṅgabhūto ghataḥ | yadi nīlādivyati-
J27r
3
4
rikto nāstīti kṛtvā tasyaupacārikaṃ pratyakṣatvaṃ parikalpyate
8
B22v nanv evaṃ sati pṛthivyādivyatirekeṇaṃ nīlādikam॰ api nāstīti
nīlāder apy aupacārikaṃ pratyakṣatvaṃ kalpyatām ||
11
12
14
yathoktam –
16
rūpādivyatirekeṇa” yathā kumbho na vidyate |
vāyvādivyatirekeṇa" tathā rūpaṃ na vidyate ||
17
CRITICAL EDITION
22
28
13
9
19
18
iti | tasmād evamādikasya lokavyavahārasya
lakṣaṇenāsaṅga-
21
23
24
hā avyāpitaiva lakṣaṇasyeti | tattvavidapekṣā hi pratyakṣa
5
|
20
25
26
27
ghaṭādīnāṃ " nīlādīnāṃ ca neṣyate | lokasaṃvṛtyā tv abhyupa- 10
29
gantavyam” eva pratyakṣatvaṃ ghaṭādīnām ||
2 J: yati
1 D: lākalpyatāmvyavahārāṁbhūto
phyir ::: iti krtvā
5 P: tasyopa°; D: °cārīkam
tvam; L: patyaksatvam
7 D: parikelpyate
12 p: asy;
nanu
9 B: °vyatiriktena; D: °vyatirakeśa; J: °vyatirekena; L: prthi-
vyādivyatirekena 10 D: nīlādīkem 11 B, L: nīlādeścar
19 D:
B, J, L: asy; D: as; PsP1: asy (compounded with following word); Tib:
yang 13 P: aucārikam; D: aupacāritam; J: opacārikam
14 Q: pari -
kalpyatām; B, J, L: kalpatām
15 B, J, L: °kena 16 B, D, L: kum-
bhā; J: kumbhā 17 B: °kena; D: °vyatirakesa
18 J: tasyād
evatādikasya 20 Q: °vyavahārarasya 21D °lakśanenāśamgrahad
D:
22 B: apyāpitaiva; D: avyāpitai; L: avyāyitaiva
23 D: laksanamsyo-
24
pi; J, L: laksanamsyeti D: °vidayeksama 25 B, J, L: pratya-
27 L: nasyate
28 D: atyu-
ksam; D: pratyakam
26 D: ghatīnām
paśabdavyam; L: apagantavyam 29 D: pratyaksanamtvam
PsPL 71
3 D: nīlo
4 Tib:
6 D: pratyakaksa-
8 J, L: natv; Tib: n.e.PsPL 72
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
§112. api cāparokṣārthavācitvāt pratyakṣaśabdasyakṣābhimukho
4
6
'rthaḥ ṃ pratyakṣaḥ| pratigatamam asmitā ghaṭanīlā -
9
10
dīnām aparokṣāṇāṃ pratyakṣatvaṃ siddhaṃ bhavati | tatparicchedakasya Q12r
12
2
269
8
11
jñānasya " tṛṇatuṣāgnivat pratyakṣakāraṇatvāt pratyakṣatvaṃ vyapadiśyate|
10
3
13
14
15
5 §113. yas tv akṣamakṣaṃ prati vartata iti pratyakṣaśabda " vyutpā-
dayati” tasya jñānasyendriyāviṣayatvād ” viṣayaviṣayitvāc ca na
17
18
1 Antecedent to the present sentence which commences with api, all
of the mss but P (= Q, B, D, J, L) present: yathoktam śatake' sarva eva
ghato 'drsto rūpe drste + hi' jāyate | brūyāt॰ kas' tattvavin' nāma
ghatah pratyaksa ity api || etenaiva vicārena sugandhi madhuram
mrdu | pratisedhayitavyāni sarvāny uttamabuddhineti" || (= CS
XIII.1 and 2). 'B, J, L: śakate; D: śateke; ±Q: drsto; B, D, L: drsto; J:
drstā ; 3D, J: rūpa; 4D: drsto; 'Q: na; D: sa; ‘D: rumāt; 7J, L: ka ; §B:
yacin; D: tavi; J, L: tasyacin; 'D: etanaiva; "D: pratisedhamitavyāni;
"Q: uttaramabu°; B: umabu°; L: °na (dandas vary). PsP Tib attests a
translation for the introduction and the two verses, and closes with
zhes bshad do || PsP1 includes the Skt text. See Translation note.
2 D: kāpasenoksārtha 3 P: pratyakşaśabdasyāks(ā)bhi(mu)[1]; B,
J: pratyaksaśabdasya sāksād abhimukho; D: pratyaksanaśabdasāksād
abhimukho; L: pratyekşaśabdasya sāksād abhimukho; PsPL:
pratyakṣaśabdasya sākṣād abhimukho; Tib: mngon sum gyi sgra
dbang po mngon du phyogs pa'i 4 P: [1](r).(h); D: 'rtha
5 p: om.
7 J: idhim; L: ipi
8 P: [1](tvā); L: kṛtā
9 Q:
D: om.
11
10
6 L: asmimnn
ghatadinām P: Ø; D: aparāksānā; J, L: avaroksānām
12 J: bhrnatu°
13 Tib: n.e. tu
14 J: pravarttata; Tib: dbang po dang
dbang po so so la 'jug pas zhes bya bas 15 D: pratyaksanaśabdam
16 P: the aksara da has been erased; D: vyat° 17 B, J, L: °visayatvā;
D: °visayitvā; PsP1: jñānasyendriyāvişayatvā[d]; Tib: shes pani
dbang po’i yul can ma yin pa’i phyir 18 B, D, J, L: c; conj. by LVP:
[visayavişayatvā]c; Tib: yul gyi yul can yin pa’i phyir
D12r270
1
yuktā vyutpattiḥ prativiṣayaṃ tu syāt pratyarthamiti vā ||
CRITICAL EDITION
.
6
2
yathobhayādhīnāyām api vijñānapravṛttāv
§114. atha syāt – yathobhayādhīnāyām
4
J27v āśrayasya paṭumandatānuvidhānād vijñānānāṃ tadvikāravikāritvād
āyeṇaiva vyapadeśa' bhavati cakṣurvijñānam iti evaṃ yady apy
8
611
L22r
artham" artha " prati vartate tathāpyakṣamakṣamāśritya vartamānaṃ vijñānam
B23r āśrayeṇa” vyapadeśāt” pratyakṣamiti" bhaviṣyati| dṛṣṭo” hyasādhāra-
ṇena kāraṇena" vyapadeśo bherīśabdo yavāṅkura iti|
3
19
5
17
18
20
naitat pūrveṇa
tulyam | tatra hi viṣayeṇa vijñāna vyapadiśyamāne
P13v_rūpavijñānam” ity evamādinā” vijñānaṣaṭkasya bhedo nopadarśitaḥ
23
1 Tib: yul so so ba'am don so so ba nyid ces bya bar ni mi 'gyur ro :
prativisayam tu syāt pratyartham iti vā. As LVP (PsPL 72, n. 3) re-
marks, the negation is difficult to explain. One could conjecture that
at least one of the PsP mss used by the translators contained a dit-
tography of tu (written as either tu or ta), and that the second aksara
was read or interpreted as na. If the negation mi goes back to Pa
tshab, did he intend mi 'gyur cig?
2 P: Ø; D: āpi 3 P: Ø; B, J:
°pravrttov; D: civijñāna°; L: °pravrttoc
B, J, L: ºvidhānā
4Q: °mandataty(?)anu°;
5 B, J, L: °vikārisvād; Tib: rnam par shes pa
rnams rten gsal ba dang zhan pa'i rjes su byed pa’i phyir_dang | de
dag 'gyur na 'gyur ba'i phyir | (separates the two ablative construc-
tions with dang ). PsP Skt is supported by the wording of AKBh ad
AK I.45ab. See Translation note. 6 B, J, L: °naiva
padr(?)śo
L: artha
7D: vya-
D: om.;
10 D: artha
11
8 J, L: caksuvi° 9 D: pady
13 P: (vy)apade[2]; D:
12 B, J, L: āśrayasya
14 Tib: nyid ·: iti 15 P: Ø; D: drsta
na; PsPL: om. kāranena; Tib: thun mong ma yin pa'i rgyus
B: caitam; J, L: naitam
18 p: ⊗; D: pūrvana
J and L then repeat tulyam tatra hi visayena
°deśātu
16 P: Ø; B, D, J, L: om. kārane-
17 P: Ø;
19 B: °na; J, L: °na;
20 P: ⊗; B, D, J, L:
5PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
5
1
PsPL 73 syād manovijñānasya cakṣurādivijñānaiḥ sahakaviṣayapravṛttatvāt |
4
5
tathā´hi nīlādivijñānaṣaṭke vijñānam ityukte sākāṅkṣa eva pratyayo
jāyate – kimetad rūpīndriyajaṃ vijñānam āhosvin mānasami-
ti| āśraye tu vyapadeśe manovijñānasya cakṣurādivijñānaviṣaya-
9
3
271
10
pravṛttisambhave" 'pi parasparabhedaḥ siddho bhavati | iha tu pramāṇalakṣaṇa-
12
13
14
vivakṣayā kalpanāpoḍhamātrasya pratyakṣatvābhyupagame sati vikalpa-
15
17
16
kā eva tadviśeṣasyābhimatatvāda" asādhāraṇakāraṇena vyapadeśe
""
18
19
20
21
sati na kiñcit prayojanam upalakṣyate | prameyaparatantrāyāṃ ca
21
vijñāna ¹ P: Ø; B: rūpavijñāne vyapadiśyamāne rūpavijñānam; J,
L: rūpavijñāne pyapadiśyamāne rūpavijñānam 22 p: Ø; D: ava°
23 ` P: Ø; B, D, J, L: °satkāsya
1
Q: °visayampra°
± B, D, J, L: tada 3 Em. following LVP and
Tib: nīlādivijñānasatke P: nīlādivisayasatka; Q: nīlādivijñānam satka-
vikalpa; B, D: nīlādiviṣayaṣaṭkā; J: nīlāhiviṣayaṣaṭkā; L: nītvādiviṣa-
yasatkā; Tib: sngon po la sogs pa'i rnam par shes pa drug la
4P: Ø;
Q: jñānam 5 P: Ø; B, J, L: pratyayāj; D: pratyayā; PsP1: pratyayaj;
em. by de Jong (1978: 35): pratyayo; Tib: shes pa re ba dang bcas pa
nyid du'gyur la 6 P: Ø; Q: rūpendriyajam 7 P: Ø; D: vijñanamm
8 P: Ø; B, D, J, L: āhosvita 9 D: āśrayeśa; J: °na 10 B, D, J: mano-
vijñānacakṣurādiº, i.e., construed as part of following compound;
PsP1: manovijñānacaksurādi°; Tib: yid kyi (rnam par shes pa mig la
sogs pa'i rnam par shes pa’i yul la jug pa yin yang). LVP does not
emend his text but remarks (PsPL 73, n. 4), “Le sens est certain mano-
vijñānasya ... °visaye
11 L: °sabhave 2 B, J, L: °vicaksaya
12
13 B, L: kalpanāpota °; D: kalpanāyātamātrasya; J: kal(?)panāpota°
14
15
16
17
19
D: °tvātyupagame; L: °tvātyupagase P: savikalpakād (samvi-
kalpakād?) P: iva; Tib: n.e. eva J: tadviśeşatvābhimatatvād;
PsPL: tadviśeşatvābhimatatvād
18 D: kincata P: [2](1)a[2]; D:
ugalaksyate; J: upaleksyate; L: upataksyate 20 Q: °paratantāyāñ; L:
°paratantāyām 21 D: va; Tib: n.e. caJ28r
272
2
pramāṇasaṅkhyāpravṛttau prameyākārānukāritāmātratayā ca samāsāditā-
5
tmabhāvasattākayoḥ॰ pramāṇayoḥ svarūpasya vyavasthāpanān nendriyeṇa
vyapadeśaḥ kiñcid upakarotīti sarvathā viṣayeṇaiva vyapadeśo
6
8
9
nyāyyaḥ ||
CRITICAL EDITION
1
11
10
12
13
§115. loke pratyakṣaśabdasya prasiddhatvād vivakṣite" 'rthe pratya- s
14
15
16
rthamiti cāprasiddhatvād” āśrayeṇaiva vyutpattir āśrīta iti PSPL 74
cet |
4
17
18
ucyate – astyayaṃ pratyakṣaśabda lokaprasiddhaḥ | sa tu yathā loke
tathāsmābhir” ucyata eva | yathāsthitalaukikapadārthatiraskāreṇa
20
21
1
B: pramāsamkhyā° 2 Q: prameyākānukāritā°; L: °mātratvātayā
³ B, J, L: samāhāditā°; D:
4 B,
Q: uparotīti; D:
9
8
samāsātaddhitātmahāvasattākayāḥ
D, J, L: °nā 5 J, L: °yena
6 D: vyapadeśeh
upakarigīti D: pisayonaiva; Tib: n.e. eva Q: nāyyah; D: tyā-
yyah 10 B, D, J, L: āloke 11 D: pratyaksanaśabdasya
12 D: vica-
ksitai; J: vivaksate
13 B, J, L: ’rtha 14 B, L: pratyaksaśabdasya-
prasiddhatvād; D: pratyakṣaśabdasyāpratiddhatvād; J: pratyaśabda-
syapra ; PsP1: pratyarthaśabdasy[ā]prasiddhatvād; Tib: dang don so
so zhes bya ba’i sgra ma grags pa'i phyir. pratyaksaśabdasyaprasi-
ddhatvād as found in B, D (D with °āpra°), J and L appears to be the
result of an eyeskip back to the first compound of the sentence. LVP's
solution is unacceptable because the content of the first ablative con-
struction is hardly a reason for the content of the second.
15 J, L:
āśrayenaiva
16 J: āśrisata
17 D: pratyakanabdo
18 PsPL: loke
prasiddhah 19 D: tasmābhir 20 Q: eveti; Tib: n.e. iti
21Q: °pa-
dārthariraskārena D: tathā°; L: °laukikadāparthatiraskārena
7PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
3
tu tadvyutpāde' kriyamāṇe prasiddhaśabdatiraskāro'pi syāt | tataś B23v L22v
4
5
6
cauṃ pratyartham ity evaṃ syāt ||
273
7
9
§116. ekasya ca cakṣurvijñānasyaikendriyakṣaṇāśrayasya pratyakṣatvaṃ na
syād vīpsārthābhāvāt| ekaikasya ca " pratyakṣatvābhāve” bahūnām'
11
13
5 api na syāt ||
19
8
14 15
16
17
18
§117. kalpanāpoḍhasyaiva ca jñānasya pratyakṣatvābhyupagamāt tena
ca lokasya saṃvyavahārābhāvāda laukikasya ca pramāṇaprameya -
vyavahārasya vyākhyātumiṣṭatvād vyathaiva pratyakṣapramāṇakalpanā
sañjāyate||
20
3 B,
5 Em.
6
1 D: tadvyatpäde 2 Q: °tiraskāre (°ro has been changed to °re); B,
J, L: prasiddheśabdatiraskāra; PsP₁: prasiddhaśabdatiraskāraḥ (see
next note); Tib: rab tu grags pa'i sgra yang spong bar 'gyur ro
J, L: prasiddha; PsP1: prasiddhah; Tib: yang
4 Tib: n.e. ca
by LVP: pratyaksam; Tib: mngon sum Conj. by LVP: evam [na];
Tib: de ltar mi 'gyur. LVP (PsPL 74, n. 2) notes that his mss read
evam, but Cambridge (my ms L) attests eva. The anusvāra must have
accidentally entered the later tradition given that Calcutta and Paris
are copied from exemplars that relied on my J. 7Q: om.; D: om.
8 P: caksurvijñānasyaikaindriya'; J, L: caksuvi °
tvam
10 B, J, L: visāthābhāvāt
cahūnām
9 D: prabhāksa-
11 J: ce
13 L:
12 L: °bhāva
15 D: vava; Tib: n.e. ca
18 D: lokasyai
14 B, D, J, L: kalpanāpota°
16 D: °tvātyupa°
17 Tib: des kyang : tena
19 Em. following LVP : pramānaprameyavyavahārasya. P, Q: pramāna-
prameyasya; B, D, J, L: pramānaprameyasya; Tib: 'jig rten pa'i tshad
ma dang gzhal bya'i tha snyad. The loss of vyavahāra could be
explained as owing to an eyeskip from vya to sya.
20 D: vārthaiva;
J: vyathaiva; L: vyartheva274
CRITICAL EDITION
tu
§118. cakṣurvijñānasamaṅgī' nīlaṃ jānāti no tu nīlamiti cāgamasya
pratyakṣalakṣaṇābhidhānārthasyāprastutatvāt pañcānāmindriyavijñānānāṃ PsPL75
Q12v
4
J2Bv jaḍatvapratipādakatvāc ca nāgamādapi kalpanāpoḍhasyaiva॰ vijñānasya
pratyakṣatvamiti na yuktametat ||
2
3
6
8
9
§119. tasmāl loke yadi lakṣyaṃ yadi vā lakṣaṇaṃ svasāmānya- 5
10
11
D12v lakṣaṇaṃ vā sarvameva sākṣādupalabhyamānatvādaparokṣam | ataḥ pratyakṣaṃ
vyavasthāpyate tadviṣayeṇa” jñānena saha | dvicandrādīnāṃ tvataimirika-
13
2 L:
1 B, J, L: caksuvijñānasangī; conj. by LVP: °vijñānasa[ma]ngi
vāgamasya 3 J: °nā 4 D: jatutva°; J: jatra° 5 B, J: °potasyaiva;
D: kalpanāyātasthaiva; L: °pātasyaiva 6 D: tasmā 7 Q: vā pratya-
8
9
ksyam (an erased but still visible pa before ksyam has a kākapada
beside it, indicating that the pratya in the upper margin is to be insert-
ed in its place); B: laksyed; D: laksyam yadi laksyam; L: laksyad
L: di Q: svalaksanam; B, J, L: laksyanam; em. by LVP: svala-
ksanam (LVP [PsPL 75, n. 1] notes that his mss read as P: laksanam
svasāmānyalaksanam vā); Tib: rang gi mtshan nyid. Ms Q and Tib’s
reading (Tib’s reading obviously influenced by a ms in Q's line) ap-
pears to be a simplified one, probably altered because the mention of
both lakṣaṇa and svasāmānyalakṣaṇa seemed redundant. Represented
here, however, is Candrakīrti's model that focuses on the laksya-la-
ksana pair, but also allows for a division of the latter into svalaksana
(e.g., the heat of fire) and sāmānyalaksana (e.g., impermanence ). Can-
drakīrti is merely listing the possible alternatives. *LT’s author’s ex-
emplar seems to have read as Q (unless we interpret his tac ca svala-
ksanam | sāmānyalaksanam vā as his explanation of the compound
svasāmānyalaksanam): <<laksam (read: laksyam) iti |>> (= marginal
insertion) prameyam tac ca svalaksanam | sāmānyalaksanam vā | (cf.
Yonezawa 2004: 125, 148 [fol. 3a3]). Q: sāmānyalaksanam; em.
by LVP: sāmānyalaksanam; Tib: spyii mtshan nyid. See previous
note.
11 B: pratyaksa
10
12 J: °na 13 3 B: dvicandrāsanāmPRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
3
4
jñānāpekṣayāpratyakṣatvam'' taimirikādyapekṣā tu pratyakṣatvam eva ||
6
§120. parokṣaviṣayaṃ tu jñānaṃ sādhyāvyabhicāriliṅgotpannam anu-
mānam||
5
1
7
9
$121. sākṣā atīndriyārthavidām āptānāṃ yad vacanaṃ sa
5 āgamaḥ||
8
10
275
§122. sādṛśyādananubhūtārthādhigama upamānaṃ gauriva gavaya iti
yathā ||
§123. tadevaṃ pramāṇacatuṣṭayāl" lokasyārthādhigamo vyavasthāpyate ||
12
13
14
tāni " ca parasparāpekṣayā sidhyanti | tasmāla" laukikam B24r
16
17
.
10 evāstu yathādṛṣṭamityalaṃ prasaṅgena prastutam eva vyākhyā-
15
5
eva vyākhyā- L23r P14r
2 D: °pe-
Q: paropaksavi
7 Q: śāksad 8 P: ati-
1 B, J, L: °jñānopekṣayā°; D: amaimirikajñānāpakṣamā
ksama
4 P: evā; D: evā
P: pratyatvam
3
6 Q: svasādhyāvyabhi°; D: sādhyāvyahi
ndriyārthavivādām; B: atindriyā°; D: ᵒyārthanidām
9 Q: āstānām
10 D: °gamam 11
12
D: prayāna° L: vāni 13 Q: sidhyanti , fol-
lowed by (in lower margin, marked for insertion) : satsu pramānesu
prameyārthāḥ satsu prameyeṣu pramāṇāni | no tu khalu svāngavikī
(read: svābhāvikī) pramānaprameyayoh siddhir iti; B, D, J, L: attest
(with minor variants) the two sentences and also include the word
arthesu after prameyesu; PsP1: includes the two sentences and ms L’s
artheşu; PsP Tib: tshad ma dag yod na gzhal bya'i don dag tu 'gyur la
| gzhal bya’i don dag yod na tshad ma dag tu gyur gyi | tshad ma
dang gzhal bya gnyis ngo bo nyid kyis grub pa ni yod pa ma yin no ||.
See Translation note.
14 D: tasmā
15 P: laukikakṣam 16 D: evā-
7 Q: prakrtam; B, J, L: prastutam; D: prastatam
17
star276
1
syāmaḥ ||
CRITICAL EDITION
2
§124. atrāhuḥ svayūthyāḥ – yadidamuktaṃ na svata utpadyante bhāvā
iti tad yuktaṃ svata utpattivaiyarthyāt | yac coktaṃ na dvābhyām
3
4
5
6
7
10
12
8
9
iti tadapi yuktam ekāṃśahāneḥ | ahetupakṣas tv ekāntanikṛṣṭa
J29r iti tatpratiṣedho" 'pi yuktaḥ | yat tu khalvidamucyate nāpi parata 5
yasmāt parabhūtā eva bhagavatā bhāvānām utpāda -
13
iti tad ayuktaṃ
kā nirdiṣṭāḥ " ||
14
PsPL 76
1 D: vyākhyāsumah. After vyākhyāsyāmah, all the mss present the
sentence laukika eva darśane sthitvā buddhānām bhagavatām dharma-
deśanā, which does not appear in PsP Tib and makes little sense here.
After the sentence, Ms P continues on with an introduction to quo-
tation and then the quotation itself ( ms Q attests neither): et
upamābhi nidarśana vaksye kin tu na tesa samo iha kaścit | pandita-
vijñajanā (leaf breaks off; text continues on the next line with:)
natimiraghnasya jñānalokasya te mane na ravir viṣaye bhūmim
khadyotīm api vindatītyādi |. None of this text appears in PsP Tib.
*LT: etat[*] upamayābhidarśitam tesām buddhānām samo na kaścid
asti yo jānāti | (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 125, 148 [fol. 3a3]). See Transla-
tion note. 2 L: tyadyante 3 P: utpattivaiy (leaf breaks off); B, J, L:
°vaiyarthāt; D: utpativaiyathāt
4 p: Ø; D: yav
5 p: Ø; Q: yatho-
ktan for yac coktam; D: roktam
6 P: Ø; L: dvātyām
7P: Ø; D:
muktamm 8 P: Ø; Q: ekāñśavihāneh; B, J, L: ekāmśahāveh; D: eka-
mśahāmeh; conj. by LVP: ekāmśa[vaikalyāt]; em. by de Jong: ekā-
mśahāneh; Tib: ma tshang ba 9 P: Ø; Q: ahetukapaksas; J: °paksa
10 P: Ø; B, J, L: ekāmtenikrsta
11 P: Ø; B: tpratisedho
ayukta 13 B, J, L: nām; conj. by LVP: [bhāvā]nām
12 B, J, L:
14 D: nirdistihPsPL77
5
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
catvāraḥ pratyayā hetur' ārambaṇam anantaram |
3
tathaivādhipateyaṃ ca pratyayo nāsti pañcamaḥ ||
2
277
[MMKI.2]
5
6
7
tatra nirvartako heturiti lakṣaṇād yo hi yasya nirvartako bīja-
bhāvenāvasthitaḥ॰॰ sa॰ tasya hetupratyayaḥ| utpadyamāno dharmo" yenā-
9
10
14
I
13
rambaṇenotpadyate”| sa tasyārambaṇapratyayaḥ | kāraṇasyānantaroṃ
15
16
nirodhaḥ kāryasyotpattipratyayaḥ
tadyathā bījasyānantaro
19
20
nirodho” 'ṅkarasyotpādapratyayaḥ | yasmin sati yad bhavati tat
17
9
1 B, J, L: hetuc. PsP1 reads hetuś cālambanam, but none of LVP’s mss
attest hetuś cā°; all present the simpler erroneous reading – the result
of r read as c • hetuc ārambanam. 2 B, J, L: ārambanam; PsPL:
cālambanam. De Jong (1978: 35) suggests reading ārambanam on the
basis of D, stating that D “has everywhere ārambana instead of ālam-
bana (77.2, 83.14, 84.1 etc.) and ārambanaka instead of ālambanaka
(85.5).” 3 D: tathivodhipatayam
4 J: om.
5 Q: nivarttako; B, D,
J: nivarttako; L: mivarhako
6 P: Ø; D: yā 7 Em. following LVP:
nirvartako. P: Ø; Q: nivarttako; B, J, L: vivarttako; D: nivarttako
8 Em. following LVP: °bhāvenāvasthitah. P: Ø; Q: °sthi; B, J, L:
°bhāvenovāsthitah; D: °bhāvenāvesthitah Q: om. (eyeskip from
ta of °sthitah to ta of tasya)
10 P: Ø; L: °no 11 P: Ø; B, D, J, L:
dharmā; Tib : dmigs pa gang gis skye bar 'gyur ba'i chos can bskyed
pa ::: utpadyamāno dharmo yenārambanenotpadyate
12 P: Ø; D:
yanā(eyeskip back to the kārikā)rambaṇemanantarī tathaivavādhipa-
tayam ca pratyayo nāsti pamcamah | tatra nivarttako hetur iti laksanāt
yā hi yasya nivarttamko bījabhāvenāvesthita nopadyate; J: yenālam-
bane; L: yenālambaśenotpate 13 J: tasyālambaṇaᵒ; L: tasyālamba-
na° 14 B, J, L: kāraṇasyāntaro; conj. by LVP: kāraṇasyā[na]ntaro
D: dhah 16 D: kāryasyātpattiº 17 B, J, L: bījasyāntaro; conj. by
LVP: bījasyā[na]ntaro
19 D: kurasyātpādapratya-
15
18 B: nirādho
mah; L: 'mkurasyatpāda° 20 D: bhaveti; J: bhatiB24v
L23v
278
CRITICAL EDITION
tasyādhipateyam' iti ta ete catvāraḥ pratyayāḥ| ye cānye purojāta-
sahajātapaścājjātādayaḥ | ta eteṣv
: ta eteṣv evāntarbhūtāḥ | īśvarādayas tu
3
5
sta
6
pratyayā eva na sambhavantīti | ata evāvadhāraya
9
10
11
pañca iti | tasmād ebhyaḥ parabhūtebhyo bhāvānām utpatter "
asti parata utpattiriti ||
§125. atrocyate – naiva hi bhāvānāṃ parabhūtebhyaḥ pratyayebhya” utpattir
13
14
iti | yasmāt
15
na hi svabhāvo bhāvānāṃ pratyayādiṣu vidyate |
avidyamāne" svabhāve parabhāvo na vidyate ||
18
19
16
[MMKI.3]
iti” yadi” hi” hetvādiṣu parabhūteṣu pratyayeṣu samasteṣu vyasteṣu
vyastasamasteṣu hetupratyayāmā anyatra vā kvacid bhāvānāṃ
23
24
25
1D: °dhiyateyam 2P: Ø; D: cānyo; Tib: n.e. ca 3 P: Ø; D:
purojātapaścājjātādayas; J: ºpaścajjādayas 4 p: Ø; Q: esv; D: etasv
5 Em. following LVP: evāntarbhūtāḥ. P: Ø; Q: avāntarbhūtāḥ; D, L:
āntabhūtāh; J: āntarbhutāh; Tib: n.e. eva 6 Q: om.; D: eve; Tib: n.e.
eva 7 Em. following LVP: evävadhārayati. P: [3]dhārayanti; Q:
° dhārayanti; B: °yamti; D evyavadhārayānte; J: evavādhārayanti; L:
°dharayanti 8 B, D, J, L: °ya
9 D: pamcata
●
10 J: abhyah; L:
12 P:
etyah 11 P: utpattir; PsP1: utpattir; Tib: skye ba’i phyir
pratya [2]; L: pratyayetya 13 P: Ø; Q: om.; D: om.
:: yasmāt
15 P: Ø; B, J, L: sva; conj. by LVP: sva[bhāvo]
18 P: Ø; Q: svesave
17 P: Ø; L: avidyamānāne
21 P: Ø; Q: om.
D: pratyamādisu
19 P: Ø; D: °vā
20 P: Ø
22 p: Ø; Q: om.; Tib:
n.e. hi
23 Em. following LVP: °gryā. P, Q: °gryām; B, D, J, L:
°gryām; Tib: rgyu dang rkyen gyi tshogs pa las gzhan 'ga' zhig la; cf.
also Candrakīrti's commentary on MMK I.3 at MABhed 93.9-11: 'dir
rkyen la sogs pa zhes bya ba ni rgyu'am rkyen dag gam | rgyu dang
14 Tib: 'di ltar
16 P: Ø;
5
PsPL 78
10PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
279
1
2
3
4
5
kāryāṇāmutpādāt pūrvaṃ sattvaṃ syāt | syāt tebhya utpādaḥ | na
6
7
8
caivaṃ yad utpādāt pūrvaṃ sadbhavaḥ' syāt | yadi syāt' gṛhyeta
11
12
10
cotpādavaiyarthyaṃ ca syāt | tasmān nāsti bhāvānāṃ pratyayādiṣu
14
13
svabhāvaḥ| avidyamāne ca svabhāve nāsti parabhāvaḥ| bhavanaṃ bhāva
15
16
5 utpādaḥ parebhya utpādaḥ parabhāvaḥ sa na vidyate | tasmād
ayuktam etat - parabhūtebhyo bhāvānāmutpattiriti ||
17
18
21
§126. atha vā” bhāvānāṃ” kāryāṇāmaṅkarādīnāṃ bījādiṣu pratya-
22
24
yeṣu satsv avikṛtarūpeṣu nāsti svabhāvo" nirhetukatva-
23
25
26
27
prasaṅgāt | tat kim apekṣya paratvaṃ pratyayādīnām | vidyamānayor "
rkyen gyi tshogs pa'am de las gzhan yang rung ste
kā
25 Q: bhāvānānām
4 p: Ø;
1 P: Ø; Q: pūrvva 2 P: Ø; B, J, L: satva 3 P: Ø; D: syāta
12 P:
11
P: Ø; B: tasyān
15
L: tetya
5 P: Ø; D: utpādā 6 P: Ø; L: utpādā 7P: Ø; B: sambha-
vah; D, J: sambhavah; L: sambhavam 8 P: Ø; Q: grhyet; B: ≈hyeta
9 P: Ø; D: °vaimarthyam; J: °vaiyathyam; L: vo°
10 Tib connects
grhyeta and utpādavaiyarthyam with'am
Ø; B, D, J, L: na cāsti
13 Tib: n.e. ca
14 Q: svebhāve; Tib: bdag gi
dngos po yod pa ma yin pa nyid yin na :: avidyamāne ca svabhāve
D: parabhya 16 P: °(bhā).(h); D, L: parabhāva 17 D: eyuktam
Em. following LVP: parabhūtebhyo. P: Ø; Q: parebhyo; B, D, J, L:
parabhyo; Tib: gzhan du gyur pa dag las
19 P: Ø; D: om. 20 0P: Ø;
L: bhānām 21 P: Ø; D: bījādisu 22 P: Ø; J: pratyesu 23 P:Ø; D:
arikrte° 24 P: Ø; D: °vā 25 Em. following LVP: nirhetu°. P: Ø; Q:
nirhatu°; B, J, L: nihamtuka°; D: nihetu°
D: ayeksya; PsP1: kimapeksam for kim apeksya
vidyamāneyor
18
26 P: Ø; B, J, L: apeksa;
27
7 P: Ø; B, J, L:
24 B, J, L: ca; D:
Q13r
D13r280
CRITICAL EDITION
3
P14v eva hi maitropaguptayoḥ' parasparāpekṣaṃ' paratvam| na caivaṃ bījāṅkurayor
yaugapadyam| tasmād avidyamāneṃ svabhāve kāryāṇāṃ parabhāvaḥ paratvaṃ
10
iti ||
6
8
9
bījādīnāṃ nāstīti paravyapadeśābhāvād eva na parata utpāda
8127. tasmād āgamābhiprāyānabhijñataiva parasya | na hi tathāgatā
yuktiviruddhaṃ vākyamudāharanti | āgamasya cābhiprāyaḥ prāgevopa-
13
12
14
varṇitaḥ ||
11
17
4
15
§128. tadevaṃ pratyayebhya utpādavādini pratiṣiddhe kriyā utpāda-
vādī manyate – na cakṣūrūpādayaḥ" pratyayāḥ sākṣād vijñānaṃ janaya-
18
J30
16
25
19
20
21
nti | vijñānajanikriyāniṣpādakatvāt tu pratyayā ucyante| sā
24
22
23
B25r L24r ca kriyā vijñāna janayati | tasmāt pratyayavatī vijñānajani-
1P: [3]+u+t+(yoh); B, J, L: maitropaguhyakayoh; D: maitrāpagupta-
yoh; PsPL: maitropagrāhakayoh; em. by de Jong : maitropaguptaka-
yoh; Tib: byams pa dang nyer sbas dag 2 B: °peksatvam; D: rāye-
ksam 3 B: om.; L: ca 4 Q: ° yo 5 B, L: yogapadyam; J: yogasā-
6 B, J, L: aviṣamāne
7Q: svebhāve
8 p: Ø; D: para-
9 P: Ø; J: eve 10 P: Ø; Q: (in upper margin, marked to
padyam
vyayadeº
be inserted after iti): ayuktam etat parata utpadyante bhāvā iti. Tib:
(gzhan las skye ba ma yin pa)s dngos po rnams gzhan las skye'o zhes
bya ba 'di ni mi rung ngo. See Translation note. 11 P: Ø; B, J, L;
°jñateyaiva; D: °jñateyaiva 12 P: Ø; J: mukti° 13 P: Ø; Q: vyaha-
14 B, J,
rah; Tib: lung gi dgongs pa yang (= āgamasya cābhiprāyah)
15 B, D, J, L: pratisiddhe
L: evāpa°; D: evārnatah; Tib: n.e. eva
16 D: kriyātā
19
17 J: cakṣūrūtpādayaḥ; L: cakṣurūyādayaḥ
18 P: Ø;
P: Ø; B: janayati; L: °tī 20 P: Ø; B, D, J, L: te; Tib:
21 P: Ø; J: bhā
kyi
22 P: Ø; J: va
P: Ø; D: vijñānām
Ø; L: tasmā 25 P: Ø; D: pratyasavatī; J: pratyayevati
Q: Śāksad
24 P:
23
5
PsPL 79
105
10
6
nasyeti ||
§129. ucyate.
1
3
kriyā vijñānajanikā na pratyayāḥ yathā pacikriyā oda-
.
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
21
2
kriyā na pratyayavatī'
[MMKI.4a]
8
9
10
11
12
13
yadi॰ kriyā kācit syāt | sā" cakṣurādibhiḥ " pratyayaiḥ pratya-
14
15
yavatī vijñānaṃ janayet | na tvasti | kathaṃ kṛtvā | iha kriyeyamiṣya-
18
jāta
ityādinā ca madhyamakāvatāre
ajāte 'pi na yuktā
16
17
māṇā" jāte vā" vijñāna iṣyate 'jāte vā jāyamāne vā| tatra
19
20
jāte na yuktā' kriyā hi bhāvaniṣpādikā | bhāvaś cen" niṣpannaḥ
kimasya kriyayā ||
J: tyās; L: tyā
bhih
śā; J: ºnā
°nispādaka
23
3 P: Ø; D: °ra
22
pureva ca naiva yuktam ||
pratipāditametat ||
23
1P: Ø; D: °krima 2 P: Ø; D: vikriyāvijñānajanikā 3 P : Ø; B, D, J,
L: ma; em. by LVP: na 4 P: Ø; J: °yā; Tib: de’i phyir rnam par shes
pa skye ba’i bya ba rkyen dang ldan pa ni rnam par shes pa skyed par
byed pa yin gyi rkyen dag ni ma yin (the sentence's added verb and
adversative is presumably for the sake of clarity)
5 P: Ø; B, J, L:
parikriyā; D: yacikriyā; PsP1: parikriyā; em. by Stcherbatsky (1927:
168, n. 3): pacikriyā; Tib: 'tshed pa’i bya ba 6 P: Ø; D: gedanasyati;
L: vada° 7D: °vati 8 L: yedi 9 B: kācidi; J: kācin
11
12 D: cakşayādibhih; L:
10 B: tyāt;
cakurādi-
16 D: °mā-
B, J, L: mā
281
5
14 D: °vattī
18 Q: isyet
13 D: pratyayam
Q: om.
20 P: Ø; J: ce
17
21 P: Ø; D: jātesya
15 D: janeyet
19 B, J, L: °nispādakā; PsP1:
22 P: Ø; D: jatmaJ30v
282
2
kartrā' vinā janiriyaṃ na ca yuktarūpā ||
3
ityādivacanāt ||
CRITICAL EDITION
6
yathoktam -
jāyamāne 'pi bhāve kriyā na sambhavati jātājātavyatirekeṇa
5
jāyamānābhāvāt |
jāyamānārdhajātatvājṃ jāyamāno na jāyate |
atha vā jāyamānatvaṃ sarvasyaiva prasajyate ||
8
iti ||
10
yataś caivaṃ triṣu kāleṣu janikriyā yā asambhavaḥ tasmān
11
12
nāsti sā | ata evāha – kriyā na pratyayavatīti|
13
14
viśeṣaṇaṃ nāsti vinā viśeṣyam
16
17
15
ityādinā
pratipāditam
18
19
putro gomānity ucyate |
4
etan madhyamakāvatāre| na hi vandhyā-
1
Q: karttā 2 L: ktarūpe
5 B, J, L: jayamānobhāvāt 6 B: yathoktam ca
3 B, J, L: esyādi 4 B, D, J, L: °kena
7 Em. following
LVP: jāyamānārdhaº. P, Q: jāyamānorddhajātatvāj; B, D, L:
jāyamānorddhajātatvāt; J: as B, ºtvāj 8P: Ø; B: prasahyate
9 Tib:
n.e. ca
10 P: Ø; D: janikrimāyā 11 P: Ø; D: nāsthi 12 P: Ø; D: tā
13 B, J, L: nāstīti; D: nāsthi. LVP (PsPL 600) corrects nāstīti of his
edition to nāsti on the basis of MA VI.57 (MABhed 148.5) and PsP
Tib (khyad par med par khyad par can yod min)
14 P: na
15Q:
nisesyam; L: visesah
16 L: mityādinā 17 L: pratiyāditam; Tib:
bstan pa nyid :: pratipāditam
19 D: usyate
18
8 B, D, J, L: °trā
PsPL 80
5
1010
1
§130. yadyevam' apratyayavatī tarhi bhaviṣyatīti|
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
§131. etadapy ayuktamityāha –
nāpratyayavatī kriyā |
[MMK 1.4b]
5
6
7
yadā pratyayavatī' nāsti' tadā katham apratyayavatī nirhetukā
8
9
5 syāt | na hi tantumayaḥ paṭo na yukta iti vīraṇamayo 'bhyupa-
12
13
gamyate"| tasmāt kriyā na bhāvajanikā ||
§133. ucyate
14
16
§132. atrāha yady evaṃ kriyāyā" asambhavaḥ | pratyayās
18
19
tarhi janakā bhaviṣyanti bhāvānām iti |
20
10
15
21
283
24
17
pratyayā nākriyāvantaḥ
[MMKI.4c]
yadā kriyā nāsti| tadā kriyārahitā” akriyāvanto nirhetu-
25
26
kāḥ pratyayāḥ kathaṃ janakāḥ ||
4 P: Ø; D:
1 L: aivam 2 P: Ø; D: asy 3 P: Ø; D: nāpratyamavati
pratyamavatī; Tib: bya ba rkyen dang Idan pa :: pratyayavati
(assumes preceding kriyā)
5 P: Ø; D: tadimm
6 P: Ø; D: om.; J,
L: kathamm 7P: Ø; D: nihertikā 8P: [1]n(t)+mayah; B, J, L:
mantumayah; D: gantumayah 9 Q: ghato; D: pata ° D: cīrana;
L: virana°; PsP1: virana°; Stcherbatsky (1927: 169, n. 2) emends to
10
14 L: avam
virana° 11 L: tyu° 12 D: tasyāt
13 L: kiya
17 B, J, L: °yā
15 L:
19 J:
18 J, L: tahi
16 D: ahambhavah
22 P: Ø;
21 P: Ø; D: nāstiyavatah
kriyācā
°nām
20 P: Ø; J, L: ucyante
D: nāsthi 23 P: Ø; D: kriyāvahitā; Tib: rkyen bya ba dang bral ba
dang bya ba dang mi Idan pa 24 P: Ø; B, J: akriyavanto; L: akriya-
vantau 25 P: Ø; D: nihetukāh; J, L: °kā 26 P: Ø; J: pratyakāh; L:
B25v
L24vP15r
284
§134. atha - kriyāvanta eva janakā iti |
ucyate
1
CRITICAL EDITION
2
3
kriyāvantaś ca santy uta || [MMK I.4d]
7
netiauṃ prakṛtenābhisambandhaḥ|
śabda | tatra kriyāyā
9
abhāva uktaḥ kathaṃ kriyāvattvaṃ pratyayānām iti | yathā ca vijñāna- 5
13
janikriyoktā” evaṃ" pacikriyādayo" 'pi bhāvā uktā veditavyā "
15
16
iti nāsti kriyāto“ 'pi samutpattir bhāvānāmiti bhavatyutpā-
dābhidhānamarthaśūnyam||
§135. atrāha – kiṃ na etena kriyāvantaḥ pratyayā ityādivicāreṇa |
17
18
19
20
1
pratyeyāh
yasmāc" cakṣurādīn pratītya pratyayān vijñānādayo” bhāvā 10
21
23
J31r jāyante tasmāc” cakṣurādīnāṃ pratyayatvaṃ tebhyaś cotpādo
24
vijñānādīnām iti ||
22
4
2 D: bhanty 3 B, J, L: ute; D: ata; Q: naiti
7Q: 'vadhā-
L: ucyamte
5 D: prakrtenādbhi°; J: °sabandhah 6 D: utpaśabdo
9
atra Q: kriyāsatvam; Tib: rkyen rnams ji Itar bya ba dang Idan ba
nyid yin :: katham kriyāvattvam pratyayānām Q: pratyayām; L:
pratyayān 10P: Ø; D: °kriyāktāh 11P:Ø 12 P: Ø; B, J, L: pari-
kriyādayo; D: °damo; PsP1: parikriyādayo; Tib: 'tshed pa'i bya ba
13 P: Ø; D: neditavyā 14 P: Ø; D: yato
15 P: Ø; D: vi
16 P: Ø; B,
19
18 J, L: °dīt
20 Q:
D: prabhāmān
17 D: yasmā
J, L: °tti
vijñānadayo; D: vijñānodayo
21 D: tasmā
23 D: pratyamatvam 24 J, L: vāmjñānādīnām
PsPL 81
rane; B, J, L: 'vadhārane; D: ācadhārane; PsPL: 'vadhārane; Tib: n.e.
8
22 D: caksuvādināmPRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
PsPL 82
§136. etadapyayuktamityāha -
1
2
3
utpadyate pratītyemān itīme pratyayāḥ kila |
5
yāvan notpadyata ime tāvan nāpratyayāḥ katham || [MMK1.5]
6
7
yadi cakṣurādīn pratyayān pratītya vijñānam utpadyata
ityasyeme
8
5
pratyayā ucyante' nanu yāvat tad vijñānākhyaṃ kāryaṃ notpadyate |
285
10
tāvadime cakṣurādayaḥ kathaṃ nāpratyayāḥ| apratyayā evety॰ abhi-
12
13
16
11
14
prāyaḥ | na cāpratyayebhya utpattiḥ sikatābhya iva tailasya ||
15
17
§137. atha matam pūrvam apratyayāḥ santaḥ” kiñcidanyaṃ pratya-
19
20
21
yam apekṣya' pratyayatvaṃ pratipadyanta iti | etadapy ayuktam |
Q13v D13v
1
B: utpadyamte; J: utpadyante; L: utpasv(?)ante 2 D: pratītyamān
3 D: (eyeskip to PsPM §145. [ sentence before MMK I.8ab]; PsPL
84.10) mānasya hi nāstyārambanena yogah | anārambana pravāyam
sarvadharma upadiśyate bhavadbhih sārasvaņa iti vākyaśesa || athānā-
rambane dharme kutañ [D 13v] ārambanam punah | atha śabdah pra-
śne kuta iti hetau | tenāyamartha kilah 4 Q: nātpadyata
L: °yā
6 D: prabhāvāt 7 L: udyata
evebhy
11 D: ahiprāyah 12 L: °yetya
śiº
5 B, D, J,
8 L: ta
14 p: om.
15 J: mata
9 L: kārya
10 L:
1³ B, L: śikatātya; D, J:
16 D: aprathyayāh; L: aprayāh
17 PsP Tib: sngar rkyen ma yin par gyur pa las :: pūrvam apratyayah
santah. The las serves to indicate a state or situation out of which
something occurs, and does not suggest that the translators read a
Sanskrit ablative or misunderstood the meaning.
18 B, J: aveksya;
D, L: avaksya 19 B: pratyayasam; J: pratyayasam; L: pratyayasvam
20 B, J, L: pratipadyata; D: pratisadyatah 21 L: ayuktav286
CRITICAL EDITION
2
B26r yat tat pratyayāntaram' apratyayasya pratyayatvena kalpyate tadapi
6
8
9
10
pratyayatve satyasya pratyayo bhavatīti tatrāpy eṣaiva cinteti" na
12
yuktam etat ||
4
yasya
7
13
§138. kiṃ ceheme” cakṣurādayo vijñānasya pratyayāḥ kalpyamānāḥ
16
17
18
19
20
L25r sato " vāsya kalpyeranna" asato vā | sarvathā ca na jya
yujyata
ityāha -
23
24
naivāsato” naiva sataḥ pratyayo” 'rthasya yujyate |
14
5
.
19 D: ve; Tib: n.e.
22 D: pratyarya
15
1 L: om.; PsP Tib: gang zhig rkyen ma yin pa ’di’i rkyen nyid du rtog
pa | rkyen gzhan de'i rkyen nyid de yang rkyen yod na yin pas :: yat
tat pratyayāntaram apratyayasya pratyayatvena kalpyate tad api pra-
tyayatve saty asya pratyayo bhavatīti. LVP (PsPL 82, n. 1) reconstructs
apratyayasya tasya for rkyen ma yin pa’di’i, but it may be more likely
that asya of the co-relative part of the sentence has been moved to the
relative part. tat pratyayāntaram appears to have been transferred to
the co-relative part and is in Tib set in a genitive construction with
rkyen nyid. Did the translators read or mentally construe tad api tasya
pratyayāntarasya pratyaye sati pratyayatvam bhavati instead of tad api
pratyayatve saty asya pratyayo bhavatīti? Or was their text, like Q's
text, corrupt (Q reads pratyayatvasya for pratyayatve sati asya), forc-
ing them to improvise?
2 L: om.
3 D: °yāntarahm
4 L: avratya-
5 D: kelpyate
6 Q: pratyayatvasya :: pratyayatve saty asya
9 Tib:
8 J, L: bhavati; PsP1: bhavati; Tib: yin pas
[MMK 1.6ab]
D: pratyaryo
10 J: asaiva 11 Q: citteti; B: cimtayati; D: cindeti; J,
’di la :: tatra
L: cintayati; PsP1: cintaneti; de Jong (1978: 36) emends D's reading
to cinteti
14
D, L: caheme; Tib: n.e. iha
13
D:
16 D: satā
17 D: kalpyaratv; L:
12 D: yaktam
15
pratyapratātyayah D: °noh
kalpyenann D: asatā
21 D: mevāsato; L: °satau
18
ca
24 D: pujyate; L: yuksyate
20 Q: yujyanta
23 B, J, L: °āsya
55
kasmādityāha -
asataḥ pratyayaḥ kasya sataś ca pratyayena kim || [MMK1.6ed]
2
asato hyarthasyāvidyamānasya kathaṃ pratyayaḥ syāt ||
3
§139. bhaviṣyatā vyapadeśo bhaviṣyatīti cet |
4
naivam
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
5
bhaviṣyatā ced vyapadeśa iṣṭaḥ śaktiṃ vinā nāsti hi bhāvitāsya|
ityādinoktadoṣatvāt ||
6
§140. sato 'pi vidyamāna
10
PsPL83 kalpanā ||
1 L: pratyaye | na
ve
L: tato
10
10 §141. evaṃ samastānāṃ pratyayānāṃ kāryotpādanāsāmarthyenāpratyayatvam
udbhāvyātaḥ" paraṃ vyastānām apratyayatvaṃ pratipādyate ||
12
9
labjo niṣphalaiva pratyaya- J31v
labdhajanmano
287
8
13
14
15
§142. atrāha – yadyapy evaṃ pratyayānāmasambhavaḥ | tathāpy asty
eva॰ lakṣaṇopadeśāt pratyayaprasiddhiḥ" | tatra nirvartako heturiti
16
18
nispalaiva
L: para
ast; D, L: ast; J: aht
L: nivarttako; D: nivarttakā
2 D: syā≈
3 B: ce
7 B, J, L: vijñānasya
8 D: laprajanmano
11 L: udbhāvyāt
Q: pratyayaparikalpana
4 D: naiva 5 D: rcad; L:
9 D:
13
14
' Q: apipratyayatvam Q: om. api; Tib: n.e. api
16 B, J: ava 17 B: pratyayasiddhis
12 B, J,
15 B:
18 B, J,288
CRITICAL EDITION
1
lakṣaṇamucyate hetupratyayasya | na cāvidyamānasya lakṣaṇopadeśo yukto
vandhyāsutasyeveti |
2
4
§143. ucyate - syād dhetupratyaya' yadi tasya lakṣaṇaṃ syān na
6
tvasti | yasmāt -
7
10
na san nāsan na sadasan dharmo nirvartate yadā |
kathaṃ" nirvartako" hetur evaṃ sati na" yujyate ||
13
14
[MMK1.7]
1
3
2
4
Q: om. yukto. Tib seems to have read ukto (brjod) instead of yukto.
Tib for the sentence (n.e. ca, n.e. iva iti): de la sgrub par byed pa ni
rgyu’o zhes rgyu’i rkyen gyi mtshan nyid brjod de yod pa ma yin pa
mo gsham gyi bu la ni mtshan nyid nye bar ston pa mi brjod do
D: °syevati; Tib: n.e. iva iti (see previous note) Tib: n.e. ucyate
· D: syā
5 D: hetupratyo 6 Q: om. na tv asti. Tib: yod pa ni ma
yin te. Candrakīrti often concludes conditional statements such as the
preceding one with a sentence in the negative; cf., e.g., PsPL 180.8-9,
202.8-9, 280.6-7. Without it, it is difficult to make sense of the follow-
ing yasmāt in connection with the verse. The loss of words may have
been caused by an eyeskip: syān may have been written as syāt, and
Q's scribe’s eye jumped from āt of syāt to āt of yasmāt. It is also
possible that earlier in the tradition the aksara nna of syān na was
read as t plus virāma, and tv asti, then no longer contextually under-
standable, was dropped. 7 B, D, J, L: sadasad 8 D: dharto 9 B,
D, J, L: nivarttate
10 D: yathā
11 PsP Tib: ji ltar sgrub byed rgyu
zhes bya :: katham nirvartako hetuh 12 Q: nivarttako; B, D, J, L:
nivarttako 13 P: hetu; B: hetum; J, L: hetu 14 Em: na. P, Q: hi; B,
D, J, L: hi; PsPL: hi (PsPL 31.8, where MMK I.7cd is also cited, like-
wise reads hi; all the mss attest hi); PsP Tib: mi; ABh, BP, PP, PPT:
mi; MMKr: mi. See Translation note.
55
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
10
tatra nirvartaka' utpādako| yadi nirvadharmo nirvarteta tamutpāda -
ko heturutpādayet| na tu nirvartate sadasadubhayarūpasya nirvartyasyā-
7
bhāvāt | tatra sanna nirvartate vidyamānatvāt | asannapyavidyamāna-
10
12
13
pakṣābhihitadoṣatvāc" ca | yata evaṃ
4
9
tvāt| sadasann api parasparaviruddhasyaikārthasyābhāvāda" ubhaya- B26v
kāryasyotpattir nāsti
|
23
PSPL 84 §144. idānīm ārambaṇapratyayaniṣedhārtham āha -
●
20
vād” vidyate hetupratyaya iti tad evaṃ” sati na yujyate” ||
24
anārambaṇa” evāyaṃ san” dharma upadiśyate|
26
27
28
athānārambaṇe " dharmoṃ kuta āramba punaḥ ||
16 17
18
19
hetupratyayo'pyato nāsti | tataś ca yad uktaṃ lakṣaṇasambha-
289
14
[MMKI.8]
4
3 D, L: dharmā Q: nirvvarttet; B, L: nivartteta; D, J:
6
5 B, J, L: nivarttate; D: nivarttata ' Q: nirvrttyabhāvāt;
1 B, D, J, L: nivarttaka ± Q: nirvvatyo; B, J: nivartyo; D: nivarttyo;
L: nivatyo
nivarttata
B, D, J, L: nivarttyasyā°; Tib: yod pa dang med pa dang gnyi ga la
ngo bo 'grub pa med pa'i phyir ro
7 J: om.
8 P: nirvartyate; Q:
nivarttate; B, J, L, N: nivarttate
ddhạ[7]; D: ºkārthasyāt; J: °viriddhasyaikābhāvāt
9 D: apih 10 p: parasparavi(ru) -
11 P: Ø; D: °bhi-
hitapadosatvāv 12 P: Ø; B: om. 13 P: Ø; B, J, L: eva 14 P: Ø; D:
16 J:
15
kāyasmātpatir; J: °patti; L: kāryasyatpatti
tata 17 J: om.; Tib: n.e. ca
18 D: om.
21 B: eva; D: amavam
L: hestuprayo
19 D: om.
20 B, J: °bha-
22 L: yuktate
vo; L: laksanasambhavo
23
3 B, J, L: ālambana°; LVP: ālambana° 24 Q: anārana; B, J, L: anā-
lambana; LVP: anālambana
26 B, L:
25 Em. following LVP: san. P, Q: sad;
B, D, J, L: sa; Tib: yod pa'i chos 'di :: ayam san dharmah
athānārambane; J: athānālambane; PsP1: athālambane
dharma 28 8 B: ārambanam; PsPL: ālambanam
27 B, J, L:
L25v
P15v290
CRITICAL EDITION
J32r iha sārambaṇā dharmāḥ' katame sarve cittacaittā ityāgamāc citta-
4
caittā yenārambaneṇotpadyante yathāyogaṃ rūpādinā sa teṣāmārambaṇa-
6
7
8
9
pratyayaḥ | ayaṃ ca vidyamānānāṃ vā parikalpyetāvidyamānānāṃ
3
12
13
vā"| tatra vidyamānānāṃ nārtha tadārambaṇapratyayena | dharmasya hy
18
bhavadbhiḥ svamanīṣikayā | na t
na v
14
15
16
17
utpattyartham " ārambaṇaṃ " parikalpyeta ' sa" cārambāt pūrvaṃ
5
19
21
vidyamāna eveti| athaivam anārambaṇe" dharme" svātmanā prasiddhe
parikalpitenety anārambaṇa evāyaṃ
22
23
kim asyārambaṇayogena
25
26
27
D14r san vidyamāno dharmaś cittādikaḥ | kevalaṃ sāramba ityucyate
28
29
asyārambaṇena kaścit
10
24
30
2 P: Ø; B,
9
8
1 P: ⊗; B: sārambanā dharmāh; PsP1: sālambanadharmāh
D, J, L: sarva 3 P: Ø; B, D, J, L: °caityā 4 P: Ø; B, D, J, L: °caitya
5P: Ø; B: yenārambane°; D: yanārambane°; PsP1: yenālambane;
Tib: skyed par byed pa :: utpadyante
6 D: °pratyayā 7 Tib: n.e.
ayam ca D: vidyamānā; J, L: °nā B, J, L: cā
10 L: °vidya-
māmānām 11 B: cā, followed by parikalpyetāvidyamānānām vā; J,
L: as B, vā pariᵒ 12 B: nāthas 13 B, J: tadārambana°; PsPL: tada-
lambana°; Tib: dmigs pa'i rkyen de : tadārambanapratyayena
14 D: utpatortham; Tib: bskyed par bya ba'i phyir : utpattyartham
15 D: āranam; L: ālambanam; PsP1: ālambanam
PsP1: parikalpyate; Tib: yongs su rtog par byed na
18 B: cārambanāt; PsP₁: cālambanāt
[1]nā(r)am(b)a[1]; B: anārambane; PsP1: anālambane
22P: asyāra (m)ba [1] °; B : asyārambana
patenety 24 PsPr: anālambana 25 P: avidyamāno; B, J, L: avidya-
māno; D: avidyamānā
26 B, J, L: dharma
27 B: sārambana; D:
sārasbana; PsPL: sālambana 28 D: bhavati; L: bhavadbhi
29 B, J,
30 Q: asyārambane; B: asyārambane; D: asvārasvanena
16 D: parikalpyet;
17 D: om.
20 P:
19 9 P: Ø; D: athevam
21 P: Ø; D:
23 D: parikal-
dharma
L: nv1
sambandho'sti ||
5
5
4
§145. athāvidyamānasyāramba parikate api na yuktam'
tad
6
8
9
anārambaṇa evāyam ityādi | avidyamānasya hi nāsty āra-
10
PsP85 mbaṇena yogaḥ|
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
14
bhavadbhiḥ sārambaṇa” iti vākyaśeṣaḥ |
13
anārambaṇa" evāyaṃ san” dharma upadiśyate | [MMK1.8ab]
.
3
15
16
17
18
athānārambaṇe" dharme kuta ārambaṇaṃ punaḥ || [MMK1.8cd]
22
291
20
athaśabdaḥ” praśne”' kuta iti hetau | tenāyam' artho 'thaivam
24
27
23
25
anāramba dharme 'satyavidyamāneṃ bhūyaḥ kuta ārambaṇam |
26
10 ārambaṇakābhāvād ārambaṇasyāpy abhāva ityabhiprāyaḥ ||
5]
9 B:
11 LVP:
1 L: sabandho 2 D: athāvidyamānasvanam; PsP1: °syālambanam
3 D: tajñ
4 D: ta
5 PsPL: anālambana
D: evāyan 7B: °dih
8 Tib: 'di ltar yod pa ma yin pa la ni :: avidyamānasya hi
nyasty; L: nnasty 10 D: ārambanana; PsP1: alambanena
anālambana; Tib: chos 'di dmigs pa med pa ni || yin pa ste gyur pa
kho na khyed kyis nye bar bstan te | dmigs pa dang bcas par zhes bya
ba ni tshig gi lhag ma :: anālambana evāyam san dharma upadiśyate,
bhavadbhih sālambanana iti vākyaśesah
12 P: sana; B, D, J, L: sa
15 Q: athānāmbane;
17 J, L: arambanam; PsP1:
D: °śabda; Tib adds preced-
21 Tib: 'dir (atra) : ayam
22 PsPL: anālambane 23 D: dharma
24 J: °ne
25 PsPL: ālamba-
nam 26 Q: ārambakā°; D: ārasvana°; PsP1: ālambana°; Tib: dmigs
par byed pa :: ārambanaka PsP1: ālambanasyāpy
14 PsPL: sālambana
13
Q: bhavan dharma
PsPL: athānālambane
16 D: dharma
ālambanam 18 B: yatah; J, L: vatah
ing zhes bya ba la
20 J, L: praśneh
27
Q14r
B27r292
L26r
3
4
5
§146. kathaṃ tarhi' sārambaṇāś cittacaittāḥ | sāṃvṛtam etal
J32v_lakṣaṇam' na pāramārthikamityadoṣaḥ||
§147. idānīṃ samanantarapratyayaniṣedhārtham āha-
7
anutpanneṣu dharmeṣu nirodho nopapadyate |
CRITICAL EDITION
tatra paścime ślokasyārdhe
14
2
8
9
nānantaram ato' yuktaṃ niruddhe pratyayaś ca kaḥ || [MMK1.9]
10
-
11
12
pādavyatyayo" draṣṭavyaś caśabdaś ca
15
bhinnakramo” niruddhe ceti | tenaivaṃ pāṭho - niruddhe ca pratyayaḥ ko
|
nānantaramato yuktam iti | ślokabandhārthaṃ” tvevamuktam||
16
18
tatra kāraṇasyānantaro nirodhaḥ" kāryasyotpādapratyayaḥ samanantara-
19
20
pratyayalakṣaṇam | atra vicāryate anutpanneṣu dharmeṣu kāryabhūteṣvaṅka-
rādiṣu nirodho nopapadyate kāraṇasya bījādeḥ | yadaitadevam' tadā
21
-
1Q: om.; Tib: n.e. tarhi 2 Q: ārambanāś; B, J, L: sārambanā; D:
sārambanamś 3 B, D, J, L: °caityah
4 J: sāvṛtam
5 D: eta
6 Q: anantarapratyaya ° ( ms P attests samanantara each of the three
times the word is compounded with pratyaya; ms Q attests samana-
ntarapratyaya only in the second case. Was Q changed to correspond
with anantaram of the verse?); B, J, L: °pratyayeni°; D: °pratyaya-
nasedhārthas
7 D: napapadyate
9 B, L: niruddham
10 B, D, J, L: °ārddha 11 D: mādavyatyayā; L: pādavyabhyayo
12 D, L: va°; Tib: yang gi sgra ni gags na yang zhes rim pa bzhin du
sbyar :: caśabdaś ca bhinnakramo niruddhe ceti P: bhinnakrame;
8 D: eto
13
B, J, L: ninnakrame; D: bhinnakrame 14 D: nivuddhe 15 D: cati;
L: veti
16 D: itih 17 B, D, J, L: °rtha
18 L: dhah 19 L: saman-
tarapra°; LVP (PsPL 600) emends to laksanah
20 D: anutpannasu
21 L: bijade
PsPL 86
105
10
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
1
2
kāraṇasya nirodhābhāvād aṅkarasya kaḥ samanantarapratyayaḥ | athā-
293
3
nutpan'pi kārye bījanirodha iṣyate evaṃ sati niruddhe bīje
'bhāvībhūte 'ṅkurasya' kaḥ pratyayaḥ | ko vā bījanirodhasya pratyaya
5
6
iti| ubhayametadahetukamityāha – niruddhe ca kaḥ pratyaya iti|
7
8
caśabdo 'nutpannaśabdāpekṣaḥ| tenānutpanne cāṅkure bījādīnāṃ nirodha
9
iṣyamāṇe 'pyubhayam etad ahetukamāpadyata iti nānantaramato
yuktam||
10
11
§148. atha vā na svato nāpi parata ityādinotpādo niṣiddhas"
tam abhisandhāyāha
12
13
14
anutpanneṣu dharmeṣu nirodho nopapadyate |
nānantaramato yuktam
iti ||
api ca
1 L: umkursya 2 Q: nantara° (ko nanatara° for kah samanantara°)
D: athānatpanne 4 D: kāye; L: kārya 5 D: 'kurasya
6 Tib: n.e.
3
8
vā. Tib conjoins the alternatives with la, structuring each alternative
such that the last five words of I.9cd (rkyen yang gang zhig yin)
appear within it.
7P: cānkura; D: cāmkuve; J: cām're; L: cā're
D: nirādhah 9 L: et; Tib: n.e. etat 10 Tib: yang na | bdag las ma
yin gzhan las min zhes bya ba la sogs pas skye ba bkag pa yin la |
skye ba bkag pa de la dgongs nas : atha vā na svato nāpi parata
ityādinotpādo nisiddhas tam abhisandhaya D: nisiddha notpādo
nisiddhas
11
12 D: tag
13 D: nirādho
14 B, L: nāpipadyate; D:
nāpa°; J, N: nāpividyate
P16r
J33r B27v294
CRITICAL EDITION
niruddhe pratyayaś ca kaḥ ||
1
2
3
ity atra pūrvakam eva vyākhyānam ||
4
5
§149. idānīm adhipatipratyayasvarūpaniṣedhārtham āha
-
bhāvānāṃ niḥsvabhāvānāṃ na sattā vidyate yataḥ |
satīdamasmin bhavatītyetan naivopapadyate|| [MMK I.10]
7
iha yasmin sati yad bhavati tat tasyādhipateyam॰ ity adhipati-
L26v pratyayalakṣaṇam| bhāvānāṃ ca pratītyasamutpannatvāt svabhāvābhāve
1 Tib: ’di la bshad pa ni snga ma nyid sbyar bar bya’o ·: ity atra pūr-
vakam eva vyākhyānam
2 Q: pūrvvam
3Q: vyākhyātam 4 B,
J, L: adhipatipratipratyaya°; Tib: da ni bdag po’i rkyen bsal bar
bzhed nas bshad pa :: idānīm adhipatipratyayasvarūpanisedhārtham
āha 5 LVP, on the basis of Tib's sa bon la sogs pa, conjectures a
following bījādīnām. None of my mss attest bījādīnām. The accept-
ance of bijādīnām into the text would imply a conflation of the hetu -
pratyaya, exemplified as bīja by Candrakīrti in his commentary on
MMK I.2, with the adhipatipratyaya, or an intersection of the one
with the other. It is not completely clear how the adhipatipratyaya
with the definition yasmin sati yad bhavati tat tasyādhipateyam was
conceptualized; the other commentators do not elaborate. The addi-
tion in Tib suggests the AK understanding of the adhipatipratyaya as
equivalent to the kāraṇahetu and of kāraṇahetu as allowing for pre-
dominant kāranahetus. Given that no mss attest bījādīnām, I refrain
from adding it to the text. It may have been included as a marginal
addition in one of the Skt mss used by the translators of the Tib.
6 D: °yas
7Q: om.
PsPL 87PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
10
1
2
3
kutas tad yadasminn iti kāraṇatvena vyapadiśyate kutaś ca tad
4
yad idamiti kāryatvena| tasmān nāsti lakṣaṇato 'pi pratyaya-
siddhiḥ ||
§150. atrāha tantvādibhyaḥ' paṭādikam upalabhya paṭādes
9
5 tantvādayaḥ pratyayā iti |
295
6
10
11
12
§151. ucyate – paṭādiphalapravṛttir eva " svarūpato " nāsti'
13
26
7
14
15
kutaḥ pratyayānāṃ pratyayatvaṃ setsyati | yathā ca paṭādiphala-
pravṛttir asatī tathā pratipādayannāha -
16
17
na ca vyastasamasteṣu pratyayeṣvasti tat phalam |
18
19
20
21
22
pratyayebhyaḥ kathaṃ tac ca bhaven" na pratyayeṣu yat || [MMK 1.11]
25
das
vatter
11 D: ava
syatsyati; J: syetsyati
asatīti
22
D: yata; J: tat
raśa°; PsPL: tantuturī°
pratyayesu; Tib: so sor
8
23
24
tatra vyasteṣu tantuturivematasaraśalākādiṣu pratyekaṃ D14v
tatrānupalabhyamānatvāt kāraṇabahutvāc ca kāryabahutbaprasaṅgāt |
27
28
18 L: °yetyah
5
1 J, L: kuta 2 P: yasminn for yad asminn. A scribe in P’s transmis-
sion line appears to have corrected yad asminn to conform with Can-
drakīrti's commentarial yasmin of the previous sentence.
4 J: yed
ca; B, D, J, L: om. ca; PsP1: om. ca; Tib: yang
following patadibhyah; B tantvādityo; D tantvādityah
ghatādikam_7 J: °bhyah; L: upalasya 8 B, J, L: ghatādes; D: pata-
3 p: om.
Q: adds
6 B, J, L:
9 J, L: tatvādayah
10 B, J, L: ghatadiphalapravrtter; D: °pra-
12 Tib: n.e. svarūpatah
13 J: °tve
14 B, L:
17 P:
16
15 Tib: n.e. ca
B, J, L: ghatādi°
20 D: te; J: c
21 L: tuven
19 J: katha
23 B, D, J: °vemataśaraśa°; L: tanturivemataśa-
24 B, J, L: pratyayam; D: pratyake; PsPL:
25 B, J, L: ghato 26 D: °upalabhyemāna°
●296
1
CRITICAL EDITION
2
3
samuditeṣvapi tantvādiṣu nāsti paṭaḥ pratyekam avayaveṣvavidyamā-
6
4
5
J33v natvād ekasya ca kāryasya khaṇḍā utpattiprasaṅgāt| tasmāt
8
phalābhāvān na santi pratyayāḥ svabhāvata' iti ||
10
§152. athāsadapi tat tebhyaḥ pratyayebhyaḥ" pravartate|
phalam
[MMKI.12abcı]
ityabhiprāyaḥ syāt|
12
apratyayebhyo 'pi kasmān nābhipravartate ||
[MMKI.12c2-d]
13
14
apratyayeṣv api nāsti phalamity apratyayebhyo " 'pi vīraṇā-
15
16
18
19
20
svarūpataḥ ||
17
B28r dibhyaḥ kasmān nābhipravartate paṭa" iti nāsti phalapravṛttiḥ"
27 J: °tvoc
28 p: om.
1 D: tentvādisu; J, L: tattvādisu 2 B, J: ghatāh; D: paśah; L: ghatoh
4Q: avayavesu vidyamānatvāt : avayavesv
5 Em: ca. P, Q: om. ca; B, D, J, L: om. ca; PsPL:
6 B, J, L: kāyasya 7 B, D: khandana
8 Tib:
3 D: prayobhyekam
avidyamānatvād
om. ca; Tib: dang
n.e. svabhāvatah
9P: tan
10 L: tetyah 11 B, D, J, L: om.; conj.
by LVP: [pratyayebhyah]
12 Em. following Saito 1984 : 230, n. 41
and 1985: 25f. P, Q: om. apratyayebhyo 'pi kasmān nābhipravartate;
B, D, J, L: om. apratyayebhyo 'pi kasmān nābhipravartate; conj. by
LVP: [apratyayebhyo 'pi kasmān nābhi]pravartate phalam. See
Translation note. P: pratyayesu D: apratyarebhyo
16
°adityah D: kalān 17 B, J, L: ghata
18 L: nyasti
°pravrti 20 Tib: n.e. svarūpatah
14
D, L:
13
19 D:
15
PsPL 88
5
105
PsPL 89
10
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
§153. atrāha
yadyanyat phalaṃ' syādanye ca pratyayāḥ | tadā kiṃQ14v
3
pratyayeṣu phalam asti nāstīti syāc cintā | nāsti tu
5
6
vyatiriktaṃ phalam| kiṃ tarhi| pratyayamayam eveti ||
§154. ucyate -
8
9
phalaṃ ca pratyayamayaṃ pratyayāś cāsvayammayāḥ |
10
phalamasvamayebhyo yat tat pratyayamayaṃ katham ||
297
[MMKI.13]
14
12
13
yadi pratyayamayaṃ" pratyayavikāraḥ phalam iti vyavasthāpyate tad
ayuktaṃ yasmāt te 'pi pratyayā asvayammayā" apratyayasvabhāvā L27r
ityarthaḥ | tantumayo” hi paṭa” iti| ucyate – syāt paṭo” yadi
eva svabhāvasiddhāḥ syuḥ | te hy aṃśumayā aṃśuvikā -
18
19
20
21
tanta
22 23
24
25
26
rā” na svabhāvasiddhāḥ|
tataś ca tebhyo
'svayammayebhyo” yat
1 L: phala 2 B, J, L: va
3 D: atti 4 D: ti 5 L: vyatiriktā 6 B,
8 Q: pratyayān
J, L: avayaveti; D: aveti
7 L: pratyayasamyam
9P: cā[1]yam[1]mayāh; Q: cātva(?)yam°; D: casva°; J: °mayoh
10 D: °mayetyā
12
13
14 D:
20
11 D: °meyam; Tib translates pratyayamaya as
rkyen gyi rang bzhin throughout D: phalām
3 D: dad
atyayammayā 15 P: tan+ma+(0); B, D, J, L: °ya
16 B, J, L: ghata;
D: pata
17 B, J, L: ghatā; D: pata
18 D: tanteva; L: tamntava
19 B, J, L: esa; Tib: n.e. eva
0 D: ta
21 P: a(ś)u(m)ayā; em. by
LVP: amśa° on the basis of Tib: cha shas; cha shas may, however, be
the translation for amśu. 22 P: a.[1](v)ikārā; em. by LVP: amśa°
24 Tib: n.e. ca
25 Q: asvayamsvabhāvebhyo; B, D, J:
’svayamayasvabhāvebhyo; L: svayamayasvabhāvebhyo; conj. by LVP:
'svayammaye[bhyo ']svabhāvebhyo; Tib: bdag nyid kyi rang bzhin
ma yin pa de dag las (= tebhyo 'svayammayebhyo). De Jong follows
D and emends PsP1 to: 'svayammayasvabhāvebhyo. He is of the opin-
ion that this reading is confirmed by Tib but note that asvayammayāh
23 D: maJ34r
298
phalaṃ paṭākhyaṃ' tat kathaṃ tantumayaṃ bhaviṣyati ||
yathoktam –
-
CRITICAL EDITION
3
ghaṭaḥ kāraṇataḥ siddhaḥ siddhaṃ kāraṇamanyataḥ |
4
siddhir yasya svato nāsti tadanyaj janayet katham||
iti ||
6
phalaṃ saṃvidyate ||
tasmān na pratyayamayam [MMK I.14a]
5
7
68
§155. apratyayamayaṃ tarhya astu |
9
10
nāpratyayamayaṃ phalam |
saṃvidyate
[MMK I.14b-cı]
2
of I.13b and of its first instance in the commentary is translated as
bdag gi rang bzhin min (that is, rang bzhin translates °maya, not
svabhāva). The paper mss presumably received the interpolated read-
ing found in Q from ms 8 via ms u.
26 L: ya
1 B, J, L: ghatākhyam
3
B: tatumayam P: patah; B: yatah; D:
pathah; J, L: patah; PsPL: patah; PsP Tib: snam bu; BP : snam bu. See
Translation note.
4 P: Ø; D: yasā
5 B, D, J, L: °mayi 6 Tib: de
phyir rkyen gyi rang bzhin gyi bras bu ni yod pa ma yin no :: pha-
lam samvidyate, i.e., Tib, unlike Skt which merely clarifies the
quarter by adding two words, provides a gloss for the quarter.
7B:
8 Q: tahya 9
D: mā°
10 Q: om.
°maya
5
105
10
PsPL90
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
3
5
iti| tantumayo' yā paṭo nāsti tadā kathaṃ viruddho vīraṇamayaḥ P16v
syāt||
12
6
§156. atrāha mā bhūt phalam' pratyayāpratyayaniyamas tu vidyate|
7
8
10
tathā ca bhavān bravīti yadyasat phalaṃ pratyayebhyaḥ pravartate 'pratya-
yebhyo" 'pi
kasmān nābhipravartata” iti| na cāsati" phale
16
paṭakaṭākhye" tantuvīraṇānāṃ pratyayāpratyayatvaṃ" yuktam | ataḥ
|
19
phalam apyastīti||
25
phalābhāvāt pratyayāpratyayāḥ kutaḥ ||
9
17
20
21
22
§157. ucyate – syāt phalaṃ yadi pratyāpratya eva syuḥ |
23
sati” hi phala ime 'sya pratyayā ime 'pratyayā iti syāt| tac ca B28v
vicāryamāṇaṃ nāstīti ||
24
eva
nyid de | de’i phyir : nāstīti
299
18
[MMKI.14 c2-d]
4 L:
1 D: °mayā; Tib adds yang ( gang gi tshe snam bu snal ma'i rang
bzhin du yang med pa)
2 D: pada
3 B, J: ghato; D: pata
5
tham
Q: viruddhe; B, J, L: om.; PsPL: om. LVP (PsPL 89, n. 5)
notes that Tib reads de’i tshe 'gal ba ' jag ma'i rang bzhin du ji ltar
'gyur and reconstructs the Skt as tadā katham
9 D:
11 D:
10 P: p+[1](rtt)ate; D: prarvarttato
14
6 B: tut
Q: bhagavā; J, L: bhagavān
°yetyah; L: pratyayah
apratyayette
12 D: vi
13 P: Ø; Q: nābhivarttate; L: nobhi° L:
vāsati 15 D: patakaśekhye
16 D: mamtu°
17 P: pratyayānām
pratyayatvam; B, D, J, L: pratyayānām pratyayatvam; LVP: pratyayā-
nām pratyayatvam; Tib: rkyen dang rkyen ma yin pa nyid
muktamm
D: °yām
24 Tib: med pa
18 D:
22
21
Tib: n.e.
19
D: phalem
20 D: yādi
23 Tib: 'di ltar 'bras bu yod na :: sati hi phale
25 B, D, J, L: °ya
viruddhavīraṇamayaḥ
8 D: tuvīti300
1
pratyayāś cāpratyayāś ceti samāsaḥ | tasmān nāsti bhāvānāṃ sva-
2
bhāvataḥ samutpattiriti||
CRITICAL EDITION
§158. yathoktamāryaratnākarasūtre
4
5
7
8
śūnyavidya' na hi vidyate kvacid antarīkṣa śakuna vā
9
padam |
15
bheṣyati ||
6
12
13
14
yo" na vidyati sabhāvataḥ" kvacit " so na jātu parahetu "
16
17
18
19
yasya naiva hi sabhāvu" labhyate" so 'sabhāvu
'sabhāvu parapatyayaḥ
katham|
20
3
1 D: samāsa 2 J: svabhāvetah; L: svabhāvath (t with virāma); Tib:
n.e. svabhāvatah Q: śūnyavidyā; B, J, L: śūnyavidye; D: śūnya-
vidyate. *LT: śūnyavidyeti | śūnyā 'vidyā (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 126,
150 [fol. 3a6]). I understand śūnyavidya of the verse as intending
śūny’ avidya. Tib: gang na'ang stong pa rig pa med pa ni ||. The first
4 Q: om. 5 P: ⊗; PsPr: kva-
ci. 6 Q: °kśe; L: °kse 7 D: śakunatya 8 Q: om. *LT: śakuner
four verses are in rathoddhatā metre.
iva padam yathā antarīkṣe nāsti (cf. Yonezawa 2004: 126, 151 [fol.
3a6]); cf. BHSD s.v. vā (= iva) 'Q: pādam 10 Em. following
9
12
LVP: yo. P: ya (following aksara damaged); Q: yan; B: ya; D, J, L:
yan
11 P: ¬; B, D, J: svabhāvatah; L: svabhāvātah 2 LVP: kvaci
13 D, J, L: sā
14 Q: °hetur; B: °hetur 15 B, D, J, L: bhavisyati
18 D: svo
16
17 PsPL: labhyati
P: sabhāvubhā; B, J, L: svabhāva
20 Em.: parapa-
19 Em. following LVP: 'sabhāvu (the metre requires a light syllable).
P, Q: 'svabhāvu; B, J, L: 'svabhāva; D: 'svabhāvu
tyayah. P Q: parapratyayah (pra° is unmetrical); B, D, J, L: parapra-
tyayah; PsPL: parapaccayah
55
PsPL 91
10
1
3
4
5
asvabhāvu' kiṃjanīṣyati eṣa hetu sugatena deśitaḥ ||
6
7
8
9
sarva dharma acala sthitā nirvikāra nirupadravāḥ śivāḥ |
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
2
21
deśitā ||
ityādi ||
301
12
antarīkṣapathatulya 'jānakā" atra" muhyati jagaṃ" ajānakam ||
13
śailaparvata yathā akampiyā eva dharma avikampiyāḥ sadā |
no" cyavanti” na pi" copapadhiṣu " eva dharmata jinena
17
18
19
20
tathā
22 23
25
26
27
28
ya" na pijāyati" " cupapadya na" cyavate na pi
na
29
jīryati dharmaḥ|
1
L: asvabhāva 2 L: puru; PsPL: param (cf. PsPL 90, n. 7).
janisyatī 4 Q: samgatena
Q: diśitah; D: dasitah
5
12
7 PsP1: drdham 4 D: °vā ° D, J: śivā; L: śitāh 10 Em. following
LVP: ’jānakā. P: jānakā; Q: jānikā; B, D, J, L: jānakā; PsP Tib: shes
pa med pa.
11 Q: tatra; PsPL: tatra. Tib: de la Q: jagah; D:
jayam 13 PsP1: evam, second syllable read as light (cf. PsP190,n.
10).
14 D: mo
15 L: cyavanni
16 Q: vi
17 P: copapadyayū; B,
J, L: nopipadyeyu; D: nopapadyasu; PsP1: copapadyayu
8 PsPL:
evam. The meter requires a light syllable; eva would have been read
as evā
Q: dharma; em. by LVP: dharmana; Tib: chos rnams
21 P: deśita; Q: diśitā 22 D: yomya; J: yoja. The next
18
19
20 D: jinana
three verses are in dodhaka metre.
23 D: ne
24 D: jasati
25 PsPL: nā, LVP (PsPL 600) corrects to no
26 B, J, L: vu°; D: vuya-
padvi 27 PsP1: no. 28 L: cyacato 29 B, J, L: jīyeti; D: jīnamti
3 Q:
6 D: ayala
L27v
J34vD15r
302
CRITICAL EDITION
1
3
4
tam jinu deśī narasiṃhas tatra niveśayi satvaśatāni ||
5
6 7
8
9
10
yasya sabhāvuṃ na vidyati kaścin no parabhāvatu cilabdhaḥ |
12
14
15
nāntarato" na pi” bāhirato" vā labhyati tatra niveśayi
nāthaḥ ||
16
17
18
19
śānta gatī kathitā sugatenā" no ca gatī upalabhyati
21
kācit |
20
2
1 B, D, L: jina
At PsPL 243.4 LVP, against the mss, emends to dar-
sayati 3 Q: narasighas; B, D, J, L: narasimghas.
4 At the equiva-
lent for PsPL 243.5, P, B, D, J and L read tatra nideśayi satvamaharsi
for tatra niveśayi satvaśatāni. LVP (PsPL 243, n. 3) states that PsP Tib
presents the equivalent for tatra niveśayi satvaśatāni. Galloway (2001:
330) accepts the reading tatra nideśayi satvamaharsī for his edition of
the citation in PsP chapter 13. 5 P: svabhāvu, also at its equivalent
for PsPL 243.6; B, D, J, L: svabhāvu 6 Q: kaści; LVP: kaści;
Galloway (2001: 330 ) accepts kaści for the PsP chapter 13 citation
Galloway (2001: 330)
10 B: ruddhah; J, L:
12 P: pi na
13 L: bāhito.
7 D: nā
8
but notes “Should be kaścid.”
11
14 D: latyati
15 D: tratra
reads parabhāva tu.
9 B, J, L: kenavi
luddhah Galloway (2001: 331) reads na-antar ato.
:: na pi, but na pi at the equivalent for PsPL 243.8
Galloway (2001: 331) reads bahir ato.
16 B, J, L: mati 17 Q: °na; P at the equivalent for PsP1 243.8: °na
18 D: nā
19 J: garja; L: garji 20 D: upalatyati. P at the equivalent
for PsPL 243.11 : upapadyati. LVP emends upapadyati of his edition to
upalabhyati (cf. PsPL 243, n. 6; Tib: rnyed pa). Galloway ( 2001: 331)
retains the reading upapadyati. 21 P: kāñcit, but P at the equivalent
for PsPL 243.11: kācit; B, D, J, L: kācit; PsPL: kāci. Galloway (2001:
331) accepts kāci.
55
PRASANNAPADĀ CHAPTER ONE
3
tatra ca vīharasī' gatimukto muktaku mocayasī bahusatvān ||
303
iti vistaraḥ ||
§159. ityācāryacandrakīrtipādoparacitāyāṃ prasannapadāyāṃ madhyamaka-
vṛttau pratyayaparīkṣā nāma prathamaṃ prakaraṇam ||
1 Em.: vīharasī. P, Q: vyāharasī, P also vyāharasī at the equivalent for
PsPL 243.12; B, D, J, L: vyāharasī; PsP1: voharasī; Tib: rnam par
gsungs. Galloway (2001: 331) emends, following LVP, to voharasi.
2 B, J, L: gatiyukto; D: muktogatimukto 3 p: muktaka, P at the
equivalent of PsPL 243.13: muktaku; Q: muktaksa; B, J, L: yuktaku;
4 L: mocasīDiplomatic Edition
Ms PDiplomatic Edition Ms P
Introduction
Given the importance of ms P for establishing the critical text of the
PSP, a diplomatic edition of it is presented here.
When I began to prepare the diplomatic edition a number of years
ago, I decided to deviate slightly from the symbols commonly used
for diplomatic transcription and to introduce one or two more of my
own invention.¹ One of the purposes for doing so was to provide the
reader who is unfamiliar with the idiosyncrasies of old Nepalese
script, and who therefore must rely on the transcription instead of the
manuscript, with additional information about the akṣaras that are
damaged or in damaged zones of the manuscript. I in particular chose
to employ the symbol " + as contrast for the symbol "." (see below
Editorial Signs) in order to distinguish parts of akṣaras physically no
longer present (owing to the fact that the palm-leaf background is no
longer present) from parts of akṣaras that are to some degree visible
but have been rendered unidentifiable due to damage.
99
There are, of course, numerous akṣaras and parts of akṣaras in ms P
that lack a piece of their base material and yet are to a degree still
visible but nevertheless unidentifiable. A decision had to be made in
each case whether the akṣara or its part should be recorded as non-
existent (i.e., as "+" or "+", respectively) or
+", respectively) or as damaged (i.e.,
or " . ", respectively). Usually if only a small part of a stroke
remained, for example, the foot of a vertical stroke that could not be
identified as belonging to any akṣara in particular, and the rest of the
akṣara had broken off or been eaten away, the akṣara was recorded
66
..
99
1 These conventions have since been used for a number of critical and diplomatic
editions produced by other scholars.308
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
as missing. However, if the top hooks of a line of akṣaras remained
after the entire bodies of the akṣaras had peeled off together with the
upper layer of palm leaf, I often recorded these akṣaras as merely
unidentifiable due to damage, because the hooks alone revealed
enough information about the probability of the akṣaras beneath them
to lead to the supposition that they quite possibly corresponded in
number and perhaps even in identity to the akṣaras expected on the
basis of the other manuscripts, but again did not supply enough detail
for the surmised aksaras to then be placed in round brackets (i.e.,
uncertain reading due to damage).
66
99
This implementation of conventions that differentiate between non-
existent and unidentifiable parts of akṣaras informs the reader
whether my indication of akṣara parts is based purely on the readings
from the other PsP manuscripts or whether it is based on marks on
the palm leaf. The small cross + was introduced primarily to
deal with the many cases of damage above the line of writing where
superscribed r, anusvāra and various vowel markers are expected. To
illustrate the system with a simple hypothetical example, if the word
karma would be attested in the other manuscripts but in ms P a piece
of the palm leaf is missing above the line of writing, I transcribe the
word as ka +ma,2 therewith informing the reader 1) that the writing
basis where the superscript r is expected is missing, 2) that I never-
theless do assume, based on the other manuscripts, an additional
element for the akṣara ma, but 3) that this assumption, owing to the
2
It would actually be transcribed ka +mạ. The additional markers added to inherent
a are explained in a following paragraph.
The conjunct rm is also attested without superscribed r in the manuscript's script and
is written as m with a short horizontal stroke (described earlier as prescript r)
attached to the left vertical stroke of m. For the example above, I assume only
superscribed r but the transcription ka +mạ could theoretically also cover an instance
of a missing alternative prescribed r; however in the latter case it would have to be
assumed that the palm leaf above ma is intact but lacking the expected r and exhibits
a hole or tear just before ma. The alternative mode of forming rm with a prescript
occurs much less often in the manuscript than the form superscript r plus m does,
and as a rule I do not assume its presence in the damaged area before m if
superscribed r is not present. Only if some sort of mark before the ma would be
vaguely visible might I assume rm with prescribed r, and in such a case I would
likely be inclined to base the transcription on the visible evidence and write [r]ma
(i.e., pre-scribed r uncertain due to damage).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
309
66
lack of a physical basis for the supposed akṣara part, could be wrong
and the word may have lacked superscript r: given the possibility that
in old Nepalese script a can be indicated with a stroke above the line,
the word may actually have been kāma. This method has the
advantage of removing ambiguity from the dot (“ . ”) commonly used
in diplomatic transcription to stand for both non-preserved (due to
damage to the basis) and existent but unidentifiable akṣara parts.
Readers of the diplomatic transcription alone are thus not burdened
with the uncertainty engendered by the bi-functional " . ", that is, they
are not left wondering if a mark over the ma was visible on the palm
leaf but was too marred to be recorded even as a damaged and thus
uncertain r―a possibility that could induce a reader to assume that
the illegible ink-mark above ma might indeed be supportive of the
reading karma attested in the other manuscripts-or wondering if the
area of palm leaf where r would be expected had perhaps been eaten
away by insects. In the first instance, there exists some solid evidence
on which to base the assumption that the expected akṣara(-part) was
originally present and legible; in the second, the physical basis for the
evidence is completely missing. It goes without saying that a diplo-
matic transcription with its various symbols is unable to perfectly
mirror all the details of a manuscript, but inclusion of the small cross
in the group of signs represents an attempt to present a somewhat
clearer picture of the manuscript and to avoid, as much as possible,
misleading the reader with respect to the evidence.
29
It was especially important to introduce + as a convention in the
present study because ms P is one of the most important extant
manuscripts of the PsP. Should other manuscripts in P's line come to
light in the future, their preserved text may contribute to restoring
some of the damaged readings in ms P; but until then, the diplomatic
edition informs when and where I literally grasp at thin air and turn
to and rely on the other manuscripts.
I also found it necessary to indicate, in cases of damage to the palm
leaf above and below the main akṣara line, that my assumptions of a
and ā within words are based on the other manuscripts and are not
completely beyond the realm of conjecture. If inherent a is expected
in a word, for example, after initial k in kadācit, but a portion of the310
3
6699
palm leaf above or below k, where other vowel markers could be
written, is missing, a will appear with a small upright or inverted
tack-like shape under it,³ i.e., as "a" or "a", depending on whether the
missing leaf is above or below. Similarly, if ā is expected in a word,
for example after d in kadācit, and the usual ā marker does follow the
consonant d but the leaf directly above it is missing, ā is presented as
a for the sake of indicating that the aksara is assumed to be dā but
may have (incorrectly) read do or dau. If, however, vowel strokes
such as the vertical stroke for i, o, ai, au or ī or the prsthamātrā
before the consonant are written beside consonants where expected
but the portion of the palm leaf containing the further necessary
identifiers is missing, I record, depending on the extent of damage in
the environs, the vowel as a single dot (i.e., “ . ”, indicating unidenti-
fiability due to damage) or in round brackets (i.e., “( )”, indicating
uncertainty due to damage). In the latter case the lower tack-like
shapes are never added to the vowel, since these are reserved for
inherent a or ā, which are not lacking any parts and can be read as
such regardless of upper or lower leaf loss; the ambiguity arises
because the missing leaf may have contained superscript markers.
66
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
Whenever missing akṣaras, or the initial or final missing parts of
akṣaras (the latter including inherent a in cases of post-consonant
damage), or akṣaras which have experienced damage to the extent
that even an uncertain (i.e., "()") reading is impossible, are recorded,
they are separated from other akṣaras by a space to make clear the
extension of the akṣara; parts of single akṣaras are not separated
from the rest of the akṣara. Thus the akṣara kta whose t is unidenti-
fiable due to damage is written k.a and can remain part of a word,
e.g., yathok.am, but an akṣara whose initial or final part, that is, a
part bordering onto the next akṣara in the transcription, is missing or
unidentifiable is separated, depending on the point of damage, from
the previous or next akṣara; e.g., if k is damaged, then yatho .tam is
transcribed. While this does not necessarily contribute to "easy
3 Unicode 031D (combining up tack below) and 031E (combining down tack below).
4 If damage, staining, etc., would occur immediately to the right of the first two
consonants (on the level of the consonants), the transcription would usually read k. d.
citPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
reading" of the transcription, it does serve to convey at a glance the
complete akṣara units in damaged areas and to minimize any
confusion regarding the akṣaras to which the dots and crosses
belong. The confusion this method aims to avoid tends otherwise to
arise particularly for akṣaras with final anusvāra and visarga.
Damaged akṣaras can be transcribed in various ways depending on
the exact place(s) of damage, for example, the akṣara ktya with
damage rendering parts of it unidentifiable can appear as .tyā, k.yā,
.t.ā, .ty., but since akṣara "part" refers to an affected section of the
aksara in relation to the unaffected section, and not necessarily to a
missing or damaged individual element of the akṣara, ktyā with
damage to t and y will be recorded as k.a (" . " here comprising all
damaged parts between the two identifiable parts of the akṣara) and
not as k..ā with two dots in the middle; and ktyā with damage to y and
ā will be recorded as kt. (" . " here comprising all damaged parts after
the still identifiable parts of the aksara and including the damaged
vowel marker) but not as kt.. with two dots at the end (“..” stands
exclusively for a full akṣara which is unidentifiable due to damage).
311
66
29
66
The separation from the next akṣara of akṣaras with loss of or dam-
age to the anusvāra or visarga specifies that + or
denote the
final element of the relevant akṣara, not a damaged first member of a
consonant cluster belonging to the following aksara. This method has
been followed consistently throughout, and although having to read
eta .yuktam for the obvious etad yuktam attested in all other manu-
scripts may prove somewhat irritating at first, the advantages of this
mode of proceeding outweigh its awkwardness. With it, I can often
show via the transcription alone what can be seen on the palm leaf; in
the case of etad yuktam, the reader can see by way of eta .yuktam that
a consonant cluster of which the initial portion has been damaged
makes up the first part of the third akṣara. This is especially useful in
cases of more extensive damage. If the words expected on the basis
of the other manuscripts are etad yuktam, and the ta of the expected
word etad as well as the d of the conjunct is so badly damaged that
identification is impossible, e...yuktam will appear. However, should
a slightly water-damaged ink-mark stand above the damaged akṣara
thought to be, according to the other manuscripts, the akṣara ta, and
should y stand alone as a full initial consonant, the transcription will
•
99312
show e .[m] yuktam, quickly revealing that the reading appears to
have been evam yuktam.
virāmas that are expected but missing on account of insect damage or
breakage are recorded as +”.
66
Stylized final m plus virāma has been recorded as m*, i.e., has not
been allotted a special sign.
Editorial Signs
+
+
()
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
///
a
a
indicates an akṣara that is physically missing due to
breakage, fibre loss, or a hole in the palm leaf
indicates part of an akṣara that is physically missing
due to breakage, fibre loss or a hole in the palm leaf
indicates an aksara that is visible but unidentifiable due
to damage to the aksara
indicates part of an akṣara that is visible but
unidentifiable due to damage to the akṣara
enclose akṣaras or parts of akṣaras whose reading is
uncertain due to damage
indicates breakage
indicates the vowel a where a is expected but where the
reading a instead of u or cannot be ascertained
beyond all doubt because the palm leaf has a hole or
has broken off below the akṣara
indicates the vowel a where a is expected but where the
reading a instead of ā, i, e, ai or o -cannot be
ascertained beyond all doubt because the palm leaf has
a hole or has broken off above the aksara³
5 "Above the akṣara" refers to the area in which the diagonal and curved strokes for
marking the vowels could be written and does not include the area to the left of the
akṣara where the pṛṣṭhamātrā stroke is written.ISH
ā
{}
({})
1
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
9
313
{{ }} enclose an unidentifiable scribal deletion. If not marked
by a footnote, the deletion involves not more than the
space for one aksara
indicates the vowel a where à is expected but where the
reading ā instead of i, o, or au cannot be ascertained
beyond all doubt because the palm leaf has a hole or
has broken off above the aksara
enclose an identifiable scribal deletion
enclose a scribal deletion of which the identification is
uncertain
line-filler: either a vertical line with a short diagonal
stroke right and downward from its centre (resembles a
cancelled danda), or two short vertical lines stacked
one above the other (resembles a broken daṇḍa)
string-hole
rectangular empty space between sections, viz.
"columns"
avagraha
virāmaDiplomatic Edition
[P 2r1] ātmabhāvonmajjanam ucchittir ucchedaḥ prabandhavicchittir ity
arthaḥ | śāsvato nityaḥ sarvvakālasthāsnur ity a ¦ □ rthaḥ| ekaś cāsāv
arthaś ce{}ty akārtho "¹bhinnārtho na pṛthag ity arthaḥ| nānārtho
bhinnārtho pṛthag ity arthaḥ| āgatir āgama¦ hvipra-
kṛṣṭadeśāvasthitānām sannikṛṣṭadeśāgamana{ḥ}²m* nirggatir nirgga-
maḥ sannikṛṣṭadeśāvasthitā ¦
[P 2r2] nām viprakṛṣṭadeśagamanam* | etir ggatyarthaḥ | pratiḥ prā-
ptyarthaḥ | upasarggavasena dhātvarthavipariņāmāt* | □ uparggeṇa hi
dhatvartho balād anyatra nīyate | gangasalilamãdhuryam sāgareṇa
yathāmbhaseti pratītyaśabdātra lyabantaḥ prāptāv a{t}³pekṣāyām
varttate {}samutpūrvvaḥ padiḥ pradurbhāvārtha iti samutpāda-
śabdaḥ prādu(r)bhā(v)e va (1)
[P_2r3] rttate | tataś ca hetupratyayāpekṣo bhāvānām utpādaḥ| pra-
tītyasamutpādārthaḥ | apare tu bruvate | i□ tir ggatir ggamanam
vināśaḥ itau sādhava ityāḥ prati +(v)īpsārtha ity evan taddhitantam
¹ The avagraha has been written over an erased bha.
2 It is difficult to determine if the pale circle over ºna is a watermark or an erased
anusvāra. It appears that the scribe partially erased the visarga he had written and
then added a small stroke under the upper circle of the visarga (over the lower
circle) in order to indicate that the circle together with the stroke now stand for the
stylized final m with vigraha.
3
t = stroke for t as initial akṣara-element.316
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
ityaśabdam vyutpādya prati prati i¦ □ tyānām vināsinām utpādaḥ
pratītyasamutpāda iti varṇṇayanti | teṣām pra(tītyasa)mutpādam vo
bhikṣa (1)
[P 2r4] vo deśayiṣyāmi yaḥ pratītyasamutpādam paśyati sa dharmam
paśyatīty evamādau viṣaye vīpsārthasya sambhavāt* | samāsa-
sambhavāc ca syāt* jyāyasī vyut(p)attiḥ| (i)ha tu.. kṣuḥ p+atītya
rūpāṇi cotpadyate cakṣurvijñānam ity eva mādau viṣaye sakṣād
angīkṛtārthaviseṣe cakṣuḥ pratītyeti pratītyaśabda ekacakṣurindriya-
he ¦
[P 2r5] tukāyām apy ekavijñānotpattāv abhīṣṭāyām kuto vīpsārthatā
prāptyārthas tv anangīkṛtārthavise șe {}pi pratītyaśabde (sa) .. (v).
+(i) .. .. + m(bh)a(v)aḥ pratītya .. +utpāda (i) + + (n)+ī .. (t)ārthaviśeșe
pi sambhavati cakṣuḥ pratītya cakṣuḥ prapya cakṣur apeksyeti
vyākhyā syāt* taddhitānte cetya(śabd)e cakṣuḥ pratī(tya)
[P 2r6] rūpāṇi cotpadyate cakṣurvvijñānamm ity atra pratītya-
sabdasyāvyayatvābhāvāt samāsāsadbhāvā(c ca) .(ibhakt)i śrutau
satyām cakṣuḥ (pratīty). + + + + + + + (ti) pāṭhaḥ (s)+ān na caita(d
ev) am ity avyayas(y)+ + + .. .tạ(sya v)yutpattir i(ty u)p(e) □ yā | yas
0
tu vīpsārthatvāt* pratyupasarggasya eteḥ prāptyarthatvāt* samutpāda-
śabdasya ca sambha(vā)rtha(tvāt*) ¦
[P 2r7] +ā(ms) +ān+ p(r)atyayān+ p(r)atītyasamutpādaḥ prāpya sambhava
ity eke prati prati vināśinā(m u) .(ā) □ daḥ pratītyasamutpāda (i) + +
+ + + + .. (kh)yā(n)am anū(dya) .. .. nam a(bh)idha .e (ta)sya + + ..
4 The line under the akṣara-element d which causes it to look like dy is not an ink-
stroke but rather a mark caused by worms.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
.ān. (vādākauśalam).
|
va tavat sa .(bhā) .. (t). () kim kāraṇam yo
(h)i prāptyar(tha)m pratītyaśabdam vyācaṣṭe nāsau pratim vī-
(ps)ārtha(m vyā)
317
[P 2v1] + .. (n)ā .(y)+ t+ prāptyạ +thậ+ k+ (n t)ạ +h+ prạt+ prāptyartha(m
e)t+ (c)a gatyartham samuditañ ca pratītyaśabdam prāptāv eva
varṇṇayati | ten(e) .. +(ī)+ + + + ■ + ..ḥ pratītya sa(m)+ (tp)ā(d)ą + + +
+ + + + + + + .. (sa)mutpādaśabdena yadi ni(r)ạvạ .. + + + + + (d)ậ
+(th)aparāma+so vivakṣi .. .. .. + + +
++ .. (tpāda) iti (vīpsā)sambandhaḥ
+++
++++++
[P 2v2] kriyate atha višeṣaparāmarṣas tadā cakṣuḥ prāpya rūpāṇi ceti
na vīpsāyāḥ sambandha it(i |) + + + [] + + nuvādākau .. + + + + + + +
+ + + + (c). (kṣ).(h) pratītya rūpāṇi co(tp). + + + + + + + + (t).
.(obh)ayārthabhi □ sambandhā(s)a +bha(vād iti)³
+ + + + +
++++++ (m). .. iti yu ¦
[P 2v3] ktya({|})nutpādānena pratijñāmātratvāt* | athāyam abhi .āyaḥ {|}
syad arūpitvād vijñānasya cakṣuṣā prāpti +nnāsti rūpinā(m)+ (v)ą
tạt*(pr)ā .. (śa)nā(d)+ t(y et)@ ++++++++++++r(i) tyạ p(i)
prāptyabhyupagamāt* prāpya □ śabdasya cāpe(kṣyaśa)bdaparyāya-
tvāt* prāpyārthasyaivācāryanāgārjunena pratītya(śa)bdąsyą tạt tat
prāpya
[P_2v4] yad utpannam notpannan tat svabhāvata ity abhyupagamāt*
dūṣaṇam api nopapadyata ity apare yac capi sva O matam vyava-
1
5 It does not appear that what follows can be the yad uktam expected by LVP's
edition. Only the lower parts of two akṣaras are visible; the first element of each,
respectively, appears to be v and t. The vertical stroke between them suggests medial
ā or medial i.318
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
sthāpitam kin tarhy asmin* satī(d)am bhavati | (a) +(y)+ (tpād)+ + +
(m) utpadyata itīdampratyayatārthaḥ | pratītyasamutpā¦ © dārtha iti
tad api nopapadyate pratītyasamutpādaśabdayoḥ pratyekam artha-
viseṣānabhidhānāt* ta
[P 2v5] dvyutpādasya ca vivakṣitatvāt* | athāpi rūḍhiśabdam pra-
tītyasamutpādaśabdam abhyupetyāraṇyetilakā divad evam ucyate
tad api nopapannam avayavārthānugamasyaiva pratītyasamutpā-
dasyācāryeṇa tat tat prāpya yad utpa{}nnam notpa □ nnan tat*
svabhāvata ity abhyupagamāt* | athāsmina satīdam bhavati hrasve
dīrgham yathā satīti {{}}'khyāya
[P 2v6] mānena tu tad evābhyupagatam bhavati hrasvam pratītya
hrasvam prāpya hrasvam apekṣya dirgham bhavatīti tataś ca yad eva
☐dūṣyate tad evābhyupagamyate iti na yujyate ity alam prasangena |
tad evam hetupratyayāpekṣam bhāvānām utpādam paridīpa yatā
bhagavatā 'he({tu})tvekahetuviṣamahetusambhūtatvam svaparobha-
yakṛtatvañ ca bhāvānām niṣiddham bhavati |
[P 2v7] tanniṣedhāc ca sāmvṛtānām padārthānām yathāvasthitam
sāmvṛtam svarūpam udbhāvitam bhavati | sa evedānīm sā □ mvṛtaḥ
pratītyasamutpādaḥ svabhāvenānutpanna{|}tvādāryajñānāpekṣyayā
nāsmin nirodho vidyate yāvan nāsmin nirggamo
annirodhādibhir astābhir viseṣaṇair visiṣyate yathā ca nirodhādayo
na santi prati
vidyata ity
6
The erased akṣara may have been vyā.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
319
[P 3r1] tyasamutpādasya tathā sakalena śāstreṇa pratipādayisyati
anantaviśeṣaṇasambhave pi7 pratītyasa ¦ □ mutpādasyāṣṭānām evopā-
dānam eṣām prā'dhānyena vivādāngabhūta{|}tvāt* | yathāvasthita-
pratīsamutpādadarśane ca saty āryāṇām abhidhānābhidheyādi-
lakṣaṇasya prapañcasya sarvathoparamāt* prapañcānām upasamā
a
[P 3r2] sminn iti sa eva pratītyasamutpādaḥ prapañcopaśama ity
u(c)yate | cittacaittānāñ ca tasminn apravṛttau jñ © ānajñeya-
vyavahārani(v)ṛttyā jātijarāmaraṇādiniravaśeṣopadravarahita {|}tvāc
chivaḥ yathābhihitaviseṣaṇasya pratītyasamutpādasya deśanā-
kriya{ }yā īpsitatamatvāt karmmaṇā nirdeśaḥ anirodham anutpādam
[P 3r3] nucchedam aśāśvatam* | anekārtham a{|}nānārtham anāgamam
anirggamam* yaḥ pratītyasamutpādam prapañco pasamam śivan
deśayāmāsa sa(mbu)ddhas tam vanda iti | yathopavarṇṇitapratītya-
samutpādāvagamāc ca tathāgatasyaivaikasyā viparītārthavāditvam
paśyan* sarvvaparapravādāmś ca balapralapānn ivāvetyātīva pra-
sādānugata ācāryo
[P 3r4] bhūyo bhagavantam viseṣayati vadatām varam iti
nirodhasya pūrva pratiṣedha utpadanirodha yoḥ paurvvāparya-
vyavasthāyāḥ siddhya(bhā)vam dyottayi .um () .. .. +i +i (|p)ūrvvañ
jātir yadi bhavej jarāmaraṇam untaram | {|} nirjja © rāmaraṇā jātir
bhave jāyet{*} a{|} cāmṛta iti | tasmān nāyaṇ niyamo yat pūrvvam
utpädena bhavitavyam paścān vi
7 The vertical stroke for medial i appears to have been written over an erased ava-
graha or danda.
8 There is an inkdrop or wormhole over prā which resembles an anusvāra.320
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
[P 3r5] rodheneti
idānīm
pipādayiṣayā utpādapra 0 tiṣedhena nnirodhādi(p).atiṣe(dh).
+(au)karya(m) + nyṣ(mā) .. + + + + + + + + + + (p)+a(t)i(ṣe)dham
+++++++
ārabhate utpādo hi □ paraiḥ pa(r)ikalpyamānaḥ svato vā parikalpyeta
parata ubhayato 'hetuto vā parikalpyeta sarvvathā ¦
anirodhādiviśiṣṭapratītyasamutpādaprati-
[P 3r6] ca nopapadyat(e) iti niścityāha na svato nāpi (p)(a)rato na
dvābhyā(m) nāpy ahetutaḥ| utpa{|}nnā jāt(u)¦ □ +i .. nte bhā(v)ā+
(kv)acana +e + + + + + + +1 + + + + (ty). +(th).(h ) (k).acanaśabd.
(ā)dha + + + + + + + + + .. (yah) tataś caivamsambandhaḥ
(n)ai(v)ą .. + + .. .(nā jā) .. .(i) .. .(e) + ..(h ) .. .. .. .e .. .. () .. + + + + +
+ .. .i (yo)jyam* | na(n)u
9
[P 3r7] ca naiva svata utpannā ity avadhāryamāṇa parata utpannā ity
aniṣṭam prāpnoti | na prāpno(ti) + + + + + (ṣ)edhasya viva(ks). ++
+++++++ .rạ(t)isedhyamānạtvāt* | yayā c(o) + + + + + (u)tpādo
na ¦ □ sambhavati | + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +
(c)+ (n). .. yuktam ityādi
10
[P 3v1] nā 'vaśeyā | ācāryabuddhapālitas tv āha {{}}¹⁰ | na svata
utpadyante bhāvās tadutpādavaiya(th)yāt* | atiprasangadoṣā □ +¹¹ + +
11
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +++
(p)i (n)a jāyeteti || atrai ke dūṣaṇam (ā) +(u)+
9
+++++++
.(ukt)+| h.
Only the lower part of an akṣara-element is visible; the element is definitely not j.
10
A visarga may have been erased.
¹¹ The microfilm gives the impression that this next sentence begins with | na ca.
What appears to be the first line of the middle column here up to but not including
+[i] [n]a jāyeteti-is however written on one or two broken and free-floating pieces
of palm leaf that have been erroneously placed and photographed with this leaf and
rather belong to the upper middle column of folio 4v. See P 4v1.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
(tv)ā
321
tudṛ(s)ṭāntānabhidhānāt* paroktad(o)ṣāparihārāt* | prasangavākya-
12
[P 3v2] C ca prakṛtārthaviparyaye{|}ṇa viparītasādhyataddharmma-
vyakto parasmād utpannā bhāvā janmasāphalyāt* | jaña ¦ □ vir(o)dhạ
. (ti k)ṛtāntạ¹² + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + .…. ..
(tvā) tatra yat tāvad uktam ☐ hetudṛṣṭāntānabhidhānād iti tad ayu-
ktam* | kiṁ kāraṇam | yasmāt paraḥ svata utpattim abhyupagacchan*
vidyamā
[P 3v3] nasya punar utpāde prayojanam pṛcchate | svata iti vidyamānam
hetutvena bravīşi tad eva cotpadyata iti na ca vidyamānasya punar
utpatt(au) (p)r. + jana+ ++ (m)+h () +13 + (v)+ +(th)+ + ...yāmạh | nạ
ca tvayotpannasya punar utpāda iṣyate na capy aniṣtheti | tasmān
nirupapattika eṣa bhavavādaḥ svābhyupagamaviruddhaś ceti | ki ¦
[P 3v4] m iyati codite paro nābhyupeti | yato hetudṛṣṭāntopādāna-
sāphalyam syāt* | atha svābhyupaga © maviruddhacodanayāpi paro
nirvarteta tadat(i)nirlajjatayā hetudṛṣṭāntābhyām api naiva nivartte-
ta | na conmattakena sahāsmākam vivāda iti sarvathā priyānu-
|
mānatām evātmana ācāryaḥ prakaṭayati asthāne py a
[P 3v5] numānam praveśayan* | na ca madhyamikasya svataḥ {|}
svatantram a{}numānam kartum yuktam pakṣāntarābhyupa
¹² The palm leaf has broken off after ntạ and the line of writing only resumes with
(tvā) tatra. The akṣaras seen in between on the microfilm belong to the misplaced
pieces of leaf referred to in the previous footnote. See P 4v2.
¹³ The few damaged akṣaras that according to the microfilm directly follow belong
to the misplaced pieces of palm leaf (see previous two footnotes). The third line for P
3v resumes with .yamah.322
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
gamābhāvāt* | tathā coktam āryadevena | sadasatsadasac ceti yasya
pakṣo na vidyate | upālambhaś cireṇāpi tasya ¦ □ vaktum na śakyata
iti vigrahavyāvartanyām coktam yadi kācana pratijñā syān me tata
eșa me bhaved do
[P 3v6] ṣaḥ nāsti ca me pratijñā tasmān naivāsti me doṣaḥ | yadi kincid
upalabheyam pravarttayeyam nivarttaye ¦ □ yam vā| pratyakṣādibhir
arthais tadabhāvān me 'nupālambha iti yadā caivam svatantrānu-
mānānabhidhāyitvam mādhyamikasya ta dā kuto nādhyātmikāny
āyatanāni svata utpannānīti ({}) svatantrā pratijñā yasyām sāmkhyāḥ
pratyavasthapsya
[P 3v7] nte ko yam pratijñārthaḥ kin kāryātmakaḥ svata uta kāraṇātmaka
iti kiñ cātaḥ kāryātmakaś cet* siddhasādhanam* kāraṇātmakaś
ced viruddharthatā kāraṇātmanā vidyamānasyaiva sarvvasyotpatti-
mata utpādād iti kutosmākam vidyamānatvād iti hetur yasya
viruddhārthatā syāt* | yasya siddhasādhanasya yasyāś ca viruddhā
[P 4r1] (rth)atāyāḥ pa(r)i(h)ārā(rtha.) (y)atna(m) kaviṣyāmas tasmāt*
paroktadoṣaprasangād eva tatparihāra ācāryabuddha palitena na
varṇṇanīyaḥ | athāpi syāt mādhyamikānām pakṣahetudṛṣṭāntānām
asiddheḥ svatantrānumānānabhidhā¦ □ yitvāt svata utpattipratiṣedha-
pratijñārthasādhanam mā bhūd ubhayasiddhena vā(num)ānena para-
pratijñāni(rā) ¦
[P 4r2] karaṇam parapratijñāyās tu svata evānumānavirodhacodanayā
svata eva pakṣahetudṛṣṭāntāpakṣālarahi taiḥ pakṣādibhir bhavita-
vyām tataś ca tadanabhidhānāt taddoṣāparihārāc ca sa eva doṣa iti
ucyate | naitad evam kin kāraṇam | □ yasmād yo hi yam arthamPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
pratijānīte tena svaniścayavad anyeṣān niścay(o)tpādaneccha(y)ā
yayopapa
[P 4r3] ttyä 'sav a(r)tho 'dhigataḥ s(ai)vopapattiḥ parasmāy upa-
deṣṭavyā tasmād eṣa tāvan nyāyo yat pareṇaiva svābhyupagama-
pratijñātārthasādhanam upādeyam | na cāyam param prati hetu-
dṛṣṭāntāsambhavāt svapratijñāmātrasāratayaiva □ kevalam svaprati-
jñānārthamātram upādatta iti | nirupapattikapakṣābhyupagamāt*
svātmānam evāyam k(e)
323
[P 4r4] valam visamvādayan* na saknoti pareṣām niścayam ādhātum
iti || idam evāsya spaṣṭataram dūṣaṇam yaduta sva ¦ © pratijñātārtha-
sādhanāsāmarthyam iti kim atrānumā(n)ṣ(b)ādhod+(āv)anatayā pra-
yojanam | athāpy avaśyam svato numāna © virodhadoṣa udbhāva-
nīyaḥ so ({})¹py udbhāvita evācāryabuddhapālitena | na svata
utpadyante bhāvās tadutpāda
[P 4r5] vaiya(r)thyād iti vacanāt* | atra hi svata ity anena svātmanā
vidyamānasya {|} parāmarṣas tathā hy asya grahaṇa kavākya-
syaitad vivara(n). + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + .i .(i )
anena ca vākyena sādhyasādhanadharmānugatasya {|} parapra-
siddhasya sādharmmyadṛṣṭāntasyopādānam* | tatra svātmanā vidya-
mānasye ¦
[P_4r6] ty anena hetuparāmarṣaḥ | utpādavaiya(rthyād) ity anena
sādhyadharmmaparāmarṣaḥ| tatra yathā ʼnimibya(h) śa ¦ □ b(d)ạḥ +
++ ++++++
++++
+++
14 The erased mark could also be a danda.
+++++ ++324
(kṛt)akatvam atropana □ yābhivyakto hetuḥ | evam ihāpi na svata
utpadyante bhāvāḥ svātmanā vidyamānānām punarutpādavaiyarthyā ¦
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
[P 4r7] t* iha svātmanā vidyamānam purovasthitam ghatādikam
punarutpādānapekṣan (dr)ṣ(t)am | tathā ca mṛt*pindā(dy)ava ¦ +++
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +
□ |
(mā)n(asya) nasty utpada i ti evam + + + + .. māna{|}tvenopa-
nayābhivyaktana punarutpädapratiṣedhavyabhi(c)āriņā hetunā sva
15
[P 4v1] ta eva sāmkhyasyān. mānavirodhodbhāvanam anuṣthitam eveti
tat kim ucyate tad ayuktam hetudṛṣṭāntānabhidhānā(d) i(ti) □ | na¹5 ca
(k)+ .. (lam) h+ tudṛṣṭān(t)ā + + + + + + + + + (paro) .. .(o)ṣāparihāro
pi (na) + + + + + ..¹6 ...(ā s)āmkhyā hi naivābhivyaktarūpasya .(u)
+ + .. ta(s)yą ghạtasya punarabhivyaktim icchanti | tasyaiva ceha
drs(t)ā(n)tatvenopā(d)ā(n)a siddharū¦
16
[P_4v2] patvāt* | anabhivyaktarūpasya ca śaktirūpāpannasyotpatti-
pratiṣedhavisiṣṭasya sādhyatvāt* kutaḥ si(ddh)a¦ □sā + + +
(kṣ)ądo¹7(ṣāśa) + + + + + + + + + .. (tā) .. ik+ ti | tasmā(t s)+ + + + + +
++ .. .. .. (yām a)pi yathopava □ rṇṇitadoṣābhāvāt* | paroktadoṣāpari-
hārāsambha(va evet)y asambaddha(m_evai)tat* dūṣaṇam iti vijne-
yam*
15 Part of the palm leaf has broken off here at the beginning of the middle column of
P 4v1 and the loose piece of the leaf containing | na ca up to and including
.(o)ṣāparihāro pi .. is to be found (erroneously) fitted into and filmed as the upper
section of folio 3v column 2. See P 3v1.
16
The line of writing for P 4v1 resumes with this illegible akṣara.
Part of the palm leaf has broken off after this akṣara and is to be found
erroneously fitted into and microfilmed as the upper part of the middle column of
folio P 3v (see previous note). The akṣaras (or their symbols) on this piece of
displaced leaf are: (ṣāśa) +++++++++ .. (tā) .. nk+ ti | tasmā(t s)+
17PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
325
18
[P 4v3] ghaṭādikam iti vādiśabdena niravaśeṣotpitsupadārthasangra-
hasya vivakṣitatvāt* | anaikāntikatā □ pi pa(ṭ)ādibhir naiva sambha-
vati .. + (v). (y)ą + + +¹8 .. gamārga. .. + + (vy). .. (r). (k)t+ḥ (p)ą-
dārthāḥ svata utpattivādinas ta □ ta eva na svata utpadyante svātmanā
vidyamānatvāt* puruṣavad itīdam udāharaṇam udāhāryam* | yady a
|
[P 4v4] pi cābhivyaktivādina utpādapratiṣedho na bādhakas tathāpy
abhivya{i¹}ktāv utpādaśabdaṁ nipātya pūrvvaṁ paścā ¦ © c cānupa-
labdhyupalabdhisādhar(m)myiņṇotpādaśabdenābhivyakt(e)r evabhi-
dhānād ayam pratiṣedho nābādhakaḥ katham punar ayam a ¦ Ortho
yathoktacarccām vinaive{}ttham vicārānabhidhānāl labhyata iti cet
tad ucyate arthavākyāni hy etāni mahā
[P 4v5] rthāni yathoditam artham samgrhya pravṛttāni ca vyākhyāya-
mānāni yathoktam arthātmānam praśūyanta iti nātra □ kiñcid anu-
pāntam sambhāvyate {} prasangaviparītena cãrthena parasy(ai)va
sambandho nāsmākam svapratijñāyā abhāvāt* | tataś ca □ siddhānta-
virodhāsambhavaḥ parasya ca yāvad bahavo doṣaḥ prasangavipa-
rītapatyā 20 apadyante tävad asmā
[P 4v6] bhir abhīṣyata eveti | kuto nu khalv aviparītācāryanāgārjuna-
matānusāriņa ācāryabuddhapali tasya sāvakāśa{|}vacanābhidhā-
yitvam yato 'sya paro 'vakāśam labhate nihsvabhāvabhāvavādinā ca
18 The akṣaras which follow are on a piece of palm leaf which has broken off at this
point and which has been photographed as part of the upper middle column of P 3v
(see preceding footnote). The akṣaras on this misplaced piece are: .. gạmārga. ..
19 The vertical stroke has a short curved stroke attached to upper end; it appears that
the scribe wrote vyakti and then erased the i marker.
2º The blur/damage above ta makes it impossible to know if an ā marker is added to
ta.326
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
sasvabhāvabhāva ¦ □ vādinaḥ prasaṁga āpādyamāne kutaḥ prasanga-
viparītārthaprasangitā | na hi śabdā dāṇḍapāśikā
[P 4v7] iva vaktāram asvatantrayanti kin tarhi sa{|}tyām śaktau vaktur
vivakṣām anuvidhīyante tataś ca parapratijñāpratiṣedha{|}mātra-
phalatvāt* {{}}prasangāpādanasya nāsti prasangaviparītārthāpattiḥ
tathā cācāryo bhūyasā prasangapattimukhe naiva parapakṣam
nirākaroti sma | nākāśam vidyate kiñcit* pūrvam ākāśalakṣaṇāt*
alaksanam*
[P 5r1] prasajyeta syāt pūrvam yadi lakṣaṇāt* | rūpakāraṇanirmuktam na
rūpam upalabhyate | ahetukam na cāsty arthaḥ kaścid ahetukaḥ
kvacid iti tathā bhāvas tāvan na nirvāṇam jarāmaraṇalakṣaṇam pra-
sajyetāsti bhāvo hi na jarāmaraṇam vine{|}tyādinā a{r}²¹thārtha-
vākyatvād ācāryavākyānām mahārthatve saty a{|}nekaprayogahetu-
tvam parikal(pye)
[P 5r2] ta²² | ācāryabuddhapālitavākyāny api kim iti na tathaiva pari-
kalpyante²³ | atha syād vṛttikārāṇām e □ ṣa nyāyo yat prayogavākya-
vistarābhidhānan kartavyam ity etad api nästi vigrahavyāvartanyām
2¹ The erased stroke may not be superscript r. It is equally possible that the scribe
first wrote athapiº for athārthaº, and then, upon noticing his error, erased the curved
stroke of i but left its vertical stroke to stand for ā, drew a diagonal line through pa
to change this akṣara to tha, and added to it superscript r. This second possibility
would explain the unusually formed th in the akṣara rtha.
2² The ta is smaller than regular tas, the size of t to which virāma is added. The
scribe either forgot to write an intended virāma or realized one was not required
after he wrote ta.
23
The scribe seems to have written te for nte; it appears that he noticed his error and
added a ta to the lower right side of the akṣara, leaving the short left curve of t of the
original te to stand for n.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
vṛttin kurvvatāpy ācāryeṇa prayogavākyānabhidhānāt*
cātmanas tarkaśāstrātikauśalamātram ācikhyāsor angī
327
api
[P 5r3] kṛtamadhyamakadarśanasyāpi yat svatantraprayogavākyābhi-
dhānam tad atitarām anekadoṣasamudāyāspadam asya tārki-
kasyopalakṣyate | kathan kṛtvā tatra yat tāvad etad uktam prayoga-
vākya tv etad bhavati | na paramārthata ādhyātmi ¦ □ kāny āyatanāni
svata utpannāni vidyamānatvāt* | caitanyavad iti kimartham punar
atra paramārthata i
[P 5r4] ti višeṣaṇam upādīyate | lokasamvṛtyabhyupe²4tasyotpā-
dasyāpratiṣidhyamānatvāt pratiṣedhe cabhyu({t})²5petabādhāpra-
sangād iti cet* | naitad yuk+am samvṛtyāpi svata utpattyana-
bhyupagamāt* | yathoktam sūtre sa vāyam bija hetuko 'nkura
utpadyamāno na svayamkṛto na parakṛto nobhayakṛto nāpy ahetu-
samutpanno neśvarakālā
[P 5r5] ņuprakṛtisvabhāvasambhūta iti | tathā bījasya sato yathāṁkuro na
ca yo bīju sa caiva ankuro na ca anyu □ ta(t)o na c(ai)va tad evam
a(n)ucchedam aśā + ta dha + + +(i) + hāpi (vakṣya)ti ()...i(ty)a ya(d).
(d). vati na hi tāvat tad eva tat* | na cā □nyad api tat tasmāt
nācchinnam nāpi śāsvatam iti paramatāpekṣam viseṣaṇam iti cet(*)
tad ayuktam sam(vr)tyā
[P 5r6] pi tadīyavyavasthānabhyupagamāt* | satyadvayāviparīta-
darśanaparibhraṣṭā eva hi tīrthikā yāvad+ (bh)ą ¦ □ yathā .i .iṣidhyante
25
t = t as initial akṣara-element.
24 The lower part of the stroke for t as the initial akṣara-element of a conjunct has
been erased and the upper part left to stand as medial e.328
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
(t)+ + + + +
+ + +
+ evam (para)matāp+ + +
i(dh)ānam .a yujyate | na cāpi □ lokaḥ svata ut(p)attim pratipanno
yata(s t)adapekṣayāpi viśeṣaṇasāphalyam syāt* | loko (h)i (sv)ataḥ
para
[P 5r7] ta {{}}ity evamadikam vicāram anavatārya kāraṇāt kāryam
utpadyata ity etāva{|}nmatram pratipa(nn)aḥ| (eva) m ācā +(y)o
p(i) vyavasthāpa + + + + + + + + + + (ṣa) .. .(ai)phalyam eva niśc+
(y)a(t)+ + + + + (tyo)tpattipratise dhannirã .i(k). +u + +i + ..
(ṇam) etad upādīyate tadā svato 'siddhādhāraḥ {} pakṣadoṣa āśrayāsi
[P 5v1] ddho (vya)26 hetudoṣaḥ syāt(*) paramārthataḥ svataś ca-
kṣurādyāyatanānām anabhyupagamāt* | samvṛtyā cakṣurādisad. ¦ □
+(ā) + +(oṣ)ą + +1 + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + ṇḍ+ | (sā)m. (tā)
+(m) + + + + .. paramārthata utpatt(i)pratiṣedhã (d)+ tpatt(ip)ra
+(is)+ .. + (ś)+ (s)ạ ..+++++ (h). n. m iti ced e(v)ạn (t)ạ(r)hi evam
eva vaktavyam syāt* sā(mvṛ)tānāñ ca ¦
[P 5v2] kṣurādīnām (p)a .. mārthato nasty utpattir iti na (c)aivam ucyate |
u(c)yamāne pi parair dravyas(a)tām eva cakṣu(r)ād(ī)nā □ + + + + .. ..
.. + + + + + + + + +ặt* | parato 's(iddh)+ + + + + + (ṣ)ạḥ syād iti (n)a
yuktam etat* | a ¦ □ tha syād yathānityaḥ śabda iti dharmadharmiṇṇoḥ
sāmānyam eva grhyate na (vi)śesah (v)i(śesa)grahane
[P 5v3] hi sati anumānānumeyavyavahārābhāva{}ḥ syāt* tathā hi yadi
cāturmmahābhautikaḥ śabdo grhyate sa parasyāsi(ddh)aḥ |
athāk(ā)śaguṇ(o) .r t+ są (b)+ + to 'siddhaḥ ta (th)+ .. .. ș(i)-
..
..
26 The akṣara, which is difficult to read, looks more like vya than vā, but may in fact
be a damaged vā.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
329
kasyāpi śabdānityatā+ pratijānāna ¦ □ sya yadi kāryaḥ śabdo grhyata
sa parato 'siddhaḥ | athābhivya yaḥ sa svato 'siddhaḥ| eva+
yathasambhavam
[P 5v4] vināso pi yadi sahetukaḥ sa bauddhasya svato 'siddhaḥ atha
nirahetukaḥ | sa parato 'siddha iti | ta ¦ © smād yathātra dharma-
dharmisāmānya(m)ātram evam i(hā)pi dharmimātra{|}m utsṛṣṭaviśe-
ṣaṇan grahīsyata iti cen na caitad evam yasmā O d yadaivotpada-
pratiṣedho tra sādyadharmo bhipretas tadaiva dharmiņas tadādhā-
rasya viparyāsamātrāsādi
[P 5v5] tātmabhāvasya pracyutiḥ svayam evānenāṁgīkṛtā | bhinnau hi
viparyāsāviparyāsau | tad yathā viparyā □ senāsatsattvena gṛhyate
taimirikeneva keśādi tada kutaḥ sadbhūtapadārthaleśasyāpy upa-
labdhiḥ yadā cāviparyāsād abhūtam nādhyāropyate vitaimi-
rikeņeva keśādi tadā kuto 'sadbhūtapadārthaleśasyāpy upa(la ¦)
[P 5v6] bdhir yena tadānīm samvṛtiḥ syāt* | ata evoktam ācāryapādaiḥ
yadi kiñcid upalabheyam pravarttayeyam ni varttayeyam vā
pratyakṣādibhir arthais tadabhāvān me 'nupalambha iti | yataś caivam
bhinnau viparyāsāviparyāsāv ato vi□ duṣām a({sya}) viparyāsāva-
sthāyām viparītasyāsambhavāt* kutaḥ sāmvṛtañ cakṣur yasya
dhar(m)i(tvam syād) iti
[P 5v7] na vyāvartate 'siddhādhāraḥ pakṣa{{}}doṣa āśrayāsiddho vā
hetudosa ity aparihāra evāyam nidarśa nasyāpi nāsti śāmyam
tatra hi śabdasāmānyam anityatvasāmānyam cāvivakṣitavisesam
dvayor api samvidyate | na D tv evañ caksuh sāmānyam śūnyatā
'śūnyatāvādibhyām samvṛtyāngīkṛtan nāpi paramār(th)ata iti (nāst).330
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
[P 6r1] nidarśanasāmyam | yaś cāyam asiddhādhāraḥ pakṣa-
doṣodbhāvane vidhir eșa eva satvād ity asya hetor asiddhārtha ¦ □
todbhāvane yojyaḥ itthañ caitad eva yat svayam apy anenāyam
yathokto 'rtho byupagatas tārkikena kathan kṛtvā santy evādhyātmi-
kā □ yatanotpadakā he{{}}tvādayaḥ tathā tathāgatena nirdeśāt* | yad
dhi yathā tathāgatena ni(r)diṣṭam tat ta(thā) ta(dyath)a
[P 6r2] śāntam nirvvāṇam iti | asya paropakṣiptasya sādhanasyedam
dūṣaṇam abhihitam anena | ko hi bhavatām abhipre({t}) □ to tra
hetvarthaḥ samvṛtyā tathā tathāgatena nirdeśād uta paramārthata iti
samvṛtyā cet* svato hetor asiddhārthatā paramā □rthataś cet* na
san nāsan na sadaśaddharmo nirvarttate yadā | sadaśadubhayātmaka-
kāryapratyayatvanirāka
[P 6r3] raṇāt tadā kathan nirvattatako hetur evam sati hi yujyate |
naivāsau nivarttako hetur iti vākyārthaḥ | tataś ca ¦ □ paramārthato
nirvatyanirvarttak. (t)vāsiddher asiddhārthatā viruddhārthatā vā hetor
iti yataś caiva svayam evāmunā nyāye na hetor asiddhir angīkṛtā
'nena tasmāt* sarvveṣv evānumāneṣu vastudharmopanyastahetuke-
(ṣu) svata eva he
[P 6r4] tvādīnām asiddhatvāt sarvvāṇy eva sādhanāni vyāhanyante
tadyathā na paramārthataḥ parebhyas tatpratya ¦ © yebhya ādhyātmi-
kāyatanajanm. paratvāt* | tadyathā ghaṭasya atha vā na pare para-
mārthena vivakṣitāś cakṣurādyādhyātmikāyatananirvarttakāḥ
pratyayā iti pratīyante paratvāt* tadyathā tantvādaya iti paratvādi!
[P 6r5] kam atra svata evāsiddham* | yathā cānye utpannā evādhyātmikā
bhāvās tadviṣayaviśiṣṭavyavahārakara □ ṇād ity a(sy)a parābhihitasyaPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
331
.e .. .. (si) + r+ +(ām) udvibhāvayiṣu .. + .. (k)+matha samāhitasya
yo(g)inah prajñā D cakşuşā bhāvayāthātmyam (pa)śyata utpāda-
gatyādayaḥ santi paramār(tha)ta iti sādhyate tadā tadviṣayavisi
[P 6r6] ṣṭavyavahārakaraṇahetor asiddhārthatā | gater apy utpādaprati-
ṣedhād eva niṣedhād iti evam svakṛta ¦ □ (sā) + +(e) + + + + + + + +
+ + + + + + + (v)ąd iti | a(dhv)ạt(va) + + + + + + (s)vato 'siddhā-
r(th)atā yojyā | na pa¦ (r)amārthataḥ sabhāgam cakṣuḥ paśyati
cakṣurindriyatvāt* | tadyathā tat*sabhāgam* | ta(th)ā .. (kṣu)ḥ
p.eksyate
[P 6r7] rūpam bhautika .. .. rūpavat kharasvabhāvā na mahī bhūtatvāt*
tadyathā 'nila ityādiṣu hetvā(dy)a .i .(i) ■ + + ++++++++++++
+ + + + + n+ik.h | k+ (s)ạttvā(c c)+ tạ(n)yạ(v)?(n)* + dhyātmi-
kānyāya(t)a + ni svata ...(padya) .. + (t). + (gh)ą + +(i) + + + +(p).
dy. ntām iti ghaṭā .īnām api sādh(y)asamatvan nā(naikā)ntikate
[P 6v1] ti cen naitad evan tathānabhidhānāt* | nanu ca yathā parakīye ....
(m)āneṣu dūṣaṇam uktam evam svānumāne(ṣ). ḍ(p)i (y)a ■ + + + + +
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + +(e)tvādidoṣaḥ prā .. + + + + + + + (yo)r
doṣo na (t)+ (n)+ kaś codyo bhavatīti () r+ .. (t)ad dū(ṣ)ą + m
ayukta+ jāyata iti | ucyate na vayam svatantram anumānaṁ
prayuñjāmahe parapra
[P6v2] tijñāniṣedhaphalatvād asmad anumānānām tathā hi paraś cakṣuḥ
paśyatīti pratipannaḥ sa tat*prasiddhenaivānu māne(n). (ni)
□
.(ā)kr(i) .. + + + + + + + + + + + m icchasi parada(rś)ą + + + + + ..
.(a)bhav(i)tvañ cangīkṛtan tasmad yatra yatra svātmādarśanan332
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
tatra tatra paradarśanam api nāsti | tadyathā ghaṭe | asti ca cakṣuḥ
svātmādarśanan ta
[P 6v3] smāt paradarśanam apy asya naivāsti tataś cadarśanaviruddha
nīlādiparadarśanam svaprasiddhenaivānumānena ¦ □ virudhyata ity
etāvanmatra .. .. + ... + +(bh). vya(t)a iti kuto 's. (tp)akṣ+ ya-
thoktadoṣāvatāro yataḥ samānadoṣa tā syāt* kim punar anyatara-
prasiddhenāpy anumānenāsty anumānabādhā
asti să ca svapra-
siddhenaiva hetu
[P 6v4] nā na paraprasiddhena lokata eva dṛṣṭatvāt* kadācid dhi loke
'rthipratyarthibhyām pramāṇīkṛtasya sākṣiṇo vacanena jayo bha-
vati parājay(o) vā kadācit* svavacanenaiva paravacanena tu na jayo
napi parājayaḥ yathā ca loke tathā nyaye pi laukikasyaiva
vyavahārasya nyāyaśāstre prastutatvāt* | ata eva ca kaiścid uktam na
parataḥ pra
[P 6v5] siddhivasād anumānabādhā paraprasiddher eva nirācikīrṣitatvād
iti yas tu manyate ya eva tūbhayavini ścitavācī sa sādhanam
dūṣaṇam vā ({nā})nyataraprasiddhasandigdhavācīti tenāpi laukikīm
vyavasthām anurudhyamānena yathokta ¦ □ nyāyo 'bhyupeyaḥ | tathā
hi nobhayaprasiddhenaivāgamenāgamabādhā kin tarhi svapra-
siddhenāpi svārthā ¦
[P 6v6] numāne tu sarvvatra svaprasiddhir eva garīyasī nobhaya-
prasiddhiḥ | ata eva takalakṣaṇābhidhānam niḥprayoja □ nam| yathā-
svaprasiddhayopapattyā buddhais tadanabhijñavineyajanānugrahād
ity alam prasangena prakṛtam eva vyākhyāsyāmaḥ parato piPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
333
notpadyante bhāvā parābhāvād eva etac ca na hi svabhāvo bhāvānām
pratyayādiṣu vidyata i{}ty atra pratipādayi
27
[P 6v7] ṣyati tataś ca parābhāvād eva nāpi parata utpadyante | api ca
anyat* pratītya yadi nāma paro bhaviṣyaj jāyeta²7 tarhi bahulaḥ
śikhino ndhakāraḥ sarvvasya janma ca bhaved khaluḥ sarvvataś ca
tulyam paratvam akhile ’janake pi yasmā ¦ □ d ityādinā parata utpatti-
pratiṣedho 'vaseyaḥ | ācāryabuddhapālitas tu vyācaṣṭe | na parata
utpadya
[P 7r1] nte bhāvāḥ sarvvataḥ sarvvasambhavaprasaṁgād iti a{|}-
trācāryabhāviveko dūṣaṇam āha tad atra prasangavākyatvāt* să-
dhyasādhanaviparyayam kṛtvā{t*} svata ubhayato 'hetuto vā
utpadyante bhāvāḥ | kutaścit* kasyacid utpattir iti prākpakṣyaviro |
dha iti | anyathā sarvvataḥ sarvvasambhavaprasangād ity asya sādha-
nadūṣaṇānantaḥpātitvād asangatārtham eta ¦
[P 7r2] d iti etad apy asangatārtham pūrvvam eva pratipāditatvāt* |
dūṣaṇānantaḥpātitvāc ca parapratijñātārthadūṣaṇeneti yat*
kiñcid etad iti na punar yatn{a}a asthiyate dvābhyām api nopa-
jāyante bhāvā ubhayapakṣābhihitadoṣaprasangāt* pra¦ □ tyekam
utpādāsāmarthyāc ca vakṣyāti hi syād ubhābhyām kṛtam duḥkham
syad ekaikakṛtam yadīti ahetuto pi
27 There may be an erased(?) virāma under the t.
28 In the upper margin above this compound the proofreader wrote the akṣara na and
then the number ‘2' (indicating the line for the "correction"); although both the
akṣara and the number were erased once the text was changed, they are still vaguely
visible. The akṣaras ᵒṇānanta° within the text are smaller and more tightly written
than the surrounding akṣaras, indicating that ᵒṇānta° was erased so that the extra
akṣara na could be included within the space available for re-writing.334
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
[P 7r3] notpadyante hetāv asati kāryañ ca kāraṇañ ca na vidyata
ityādivakṣyamāṇadoṣaprasangāt* | gṛhyeta nai ☐ va ca jagad yadi
hetuśūnyam syād yadva(d) eva gaganotpalavarṇṇagandhād ityādido-
ṣaprasangāc ca | ācāryabuddhapālitas tv āha | a ¦ □ hetuto notpadyante
bhāvāḥ sadā ca sarvvataś ca sarvvasambhaprasangād iti | atrāpy
ācāryo bhāviveko dūṣaṇa
[P 7r4] m āha atrāpi prasangavākyatvād yadi viparītasya sādhyasādha-
navyaktir vākyārtha iṣyate tadaitad uktam bhavati hetuta
utpadyante bhāvāḥ kadāci(t) kutaścit* kasyaci .utpadya(n)t(e)
cārambha{v}sadbhāvād iti seyam vyākhyā na yuktā prāg uktadoṣā Ⓒ
d iti tad etad ayuktam pūrvvoditaparihārād ity apare yac cāpīśva-
|
rādīnām upasangrahārthaḥ tad a{|}pi na ¦
[P 7r5] yuktam īśvarā{}dīnām svaparobhayapakṣeṣu yathā cābhyu-
pagamam antarbhāvād iti | tasmāt prasādhitam etan nā¦ □sty utpāda
iti | utpādāsam(bh). .(ā) + (s)i .o (')n+ +(p)ā(d)ādiv(i)śiṣṭaḥ pratīt.ą ..
(m)+ tpāda iti | atrāha | yady evam anutpādādi ¦ □ viśiṣṭaḥ pratītya-
samutpādo vyavasthāpito bhavadbhir yat tarhi bhagavatoktam
avidyāpratya{|}yāḥ samskārāḥ | a ¦
[P 7r6] vidyānirodhāt samskāranirodhaḥ | tathā anityā cata samskārā
utpādavyayadharmiṇaḥ | utpadya hi nirudhyante □ teṣām +yupṣ-
(s)ạmạh (sukh)?+++++ + + + + + (y). duta catvāra (ā) + ++++
.. (m pā)(1)ạyato hrīś cāpatrāpya □ñ cetyādi tathā paralokād ihāga-
manam ihalokāc ca paralokagamanam ity evam nirodhādiviśiṣṭaḥ pra
[P 7r7] tītyasamutpādo deśito bhagavatā sa kathan na virudhyata .. (ti |)
eva hi nirodhadayaḥ pratītyasam+ (tp)ā □ + + + + + + + + + + + ++ + +
PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
+ + + (ā)cāryeṇa ne(y)a(n)+ + + + + (nt)+ + + ..
(pa)darśanārtham* | tatra □ ya ete pratītyasamutpā(d). .. tpādādṣya
uktā na te vigatāvidyātaimirāṇām sarvvajñānām viṣaye!
..
335
[P 7v1] svabhāvāpekṣyayā kin tarhy avidyātimiropahatamatinayanajñ+
(nā)p+ kṣṇyā | tattvadarśanāpekṣayā tūktam bhagavṛtā □ () e i +
(kṣ)+ .(h) + + + + + + + + + + + + + + (s)arvvasamskārā .. + + moșą-
dhạrmmā .. + + + + + nās(ty a)tra tathatā □ vā| avitathatā vā mo(ṣa-
dh)ạrmmakam apy etat* | pralopadharmmakam apy etat* | mṛṣāpy
etat* | mā({t})2⁹yeyam bāla
301
[P 7v2] lāpinīti tathā {} phenapindopamam rūpam vedanā bu-
dbudopamā marīcisadṛśī samjñā samskārāḥ kadalīnibhā □ h
mayopama{|}ñ ca vijñā .. m ukt+ + + + + .. + + + + r(m)ān a(ve)³⁰kṣa-
māṇ(o) .i + + (y). (v)ān* divā vā yadi vā rātrau sa ¦ □mpra-
jānan* prat(i)smṛ{i}³¹taḥ | pratividdheta³2 padam sāntam samskā-
ropasamam śivam iti | nirātmatvāc ca dharmmāṇām i
[P 7v3] tyādi yasyaivan deśanābhiprāyānabhijñatayā sandehaḥ syāt* kā
hy atra deśanā tatvārthā kā nu khalv ābhiprāyi © kīti yaś capi
mandabuddhitayā ne .ā +than d. śanā+ nītār(th)ām avaga(cch)ati tayor
ubhayor api vineyajanayor ācāryo yuktyāgamābhyām śamśaya-
mithyājñānayor apākaraṇārtham idam ārabdhavān* | tatra na svata
ityādinā
29
t = t as initial akşara-element.
30 vai?
31 The scribe wrote smrti.
32
There may be a virāma under t.336
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
[P 7v4] yuktir upavarṇṇitā | tan mṛṣā moṣadharma yad bhagavān ity
abhāṣata | sarvve ca moṣadharmāṇaḥ samskārās te ¦ □ na te mṛṣā ||
pūrvvā prajñāyate kotir nety uvāca mahāmuniḥ sa+ sāro 'navarāgro
hi nāsy ādir nāpi paścimam* | kātyāyanā¦ □ vavāde cāsti nāstīti
cobhayam* pratiṣiddham bhagavatā bhāvābhāvavibhāvinetyādinā
āgamo varnni
[P 7v5] taḥuktañ cāryākṣaya{i}³matisūtre katame sūtrāntā neyārthāḥ |
ka{}tame nītārthaḥ ye sūtrāntā mārggāvatārāya nirdiṣṭā ima
ucyante neyārthāḥ | ye sūtrāntā phalāvatārāya nirdiṣṭā | ima ucyante
nītārthāḥ | yāvad ye sūtū³¹āntāḥ śūnya □ tānimittāpraṇihitānabhi-
samskārājātānutpādābhāvaniḥsatvanirjjīvanihpudgalāsvāmikavi
34-
[P 7v6] mokṣamukhā nirddiṣṭās ta ucyante nītārthaḥ iyam ucyate
bhadanta śāradvatīputra nītārthasūtāntapratiśaraṇatā na neyārtha-
pratiśaraṇateti| tathā aryasamādhirājasūtre | nītārthasūtrāntaviśeșa
jānatī yathopadiṣṭā sugate na śūnyatām* yasmin* punaḥ {}
pudgala satva pūruṣo neyārthatā jānati śarvvadharmān iti tasmad
utpādā
[P 7v7] dideśanām mṛṣārthāṁ pratipā{i}³dayitum pratītyasamutpā-
dānupradarśanam āraccavān ācārryaḥ³6 | nanu cotpā¦ □ dādīnām
abhāve sati yadi sarvvadharmāṇām mṛṣātvapratipādanārtham idam
ārabdhavān ācāryaḥ nanv evam sati yan mṛṣā na tad astīti □ na santy
33 The scribe wrote mi.
34
tr mistakenly written as tū.
The scribe wrote di.
36
Both prescribed and superscribed r are attached to y.
35PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
337
akuśalāni karmmāṇi tadabhāvān na santi durggatayaḥ na santi
kuśalāni tada{{}}bhāvān na santi su
[P 8r1] gatayaḥ sugatidurgatyasambhavāc ca nāsti samsāra iti
sarvvārambhavaiyarthyam eva syāt | ucyate | samvṛtisatyavyape-
kṣayā laukikasyedam satyabhinivesa{}sya pratipakṣabhāvena
mṛṣārtha{|}tā bhāvānāṁ pratipādyate 'smābhiḥ | naiva tv āryaḥ kṛta-
kāryāḥ³7 kiñci □ d upalambhante yan mṛṣā vā amṛṣā vā syād iti | api
cayena hi sarvvadharmmāṇām mṛṣātvam parijñātam kin tasya +
39
[P 8r2] rmāṇi santi samsāro vāsti na cāpy asau kasyacid dharma-
syāstitvam nāstitvam³8 vopalabhate | yathoktam bhagavatāryaratna-
kūṭasū³⁹ □ tre | cittam hi kāśyapa parigaveṣyamāṇam na labhyate |
yan na labhyate tan nopalabhyate | yan nopalabhyate tan naivātīta
nānāgatan na pratyutpannam yan naivātītam nānāgatam na
|
pratyutpannan tasya nāsti svabhāvaḥ yasya nästi svabhāvas tasya
37
An unidentifiable erased correction (kṛtakāryāḥ?) is written in the upper margin of
the palm leaf above this compound. The words naiva tv āryaḥ kṛtakāryāḥ in the body
of the text are smaller and more tightly written than the surrounding text, indicating
that text was erased in order to fit in the correction.
38
āstitvam nāstitvam has been written more tightly and smaller than the surrounding
text, indicating that the original text was erased and then corrected at this point.
There appears to be an unidentifiable erased proofreader's correction in the upper
margin of the palm leaf directly above these words.
39 There is an unidentifiable correction in the upper margin directly above
ratnakūṭasū, of which only the number ‘2’ (indicating the line for the correction) is
visible. ratnakūṭasū has been written tightly in the body of the text, indicating that
the original text was erased and the correct text squeezed in.
40 The akṣara nā and then the number '2' were written, and later erased, in the upper
margin above this word; nānā is written tightly in the body of the text, indicating
that the original nā was erased and nānā entered in its place.338
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
[P 8r3] nāsty utpādaḥ yasya nāsty utpādas tasya nāsti nirodhaḥ iti
|
vistaraḥ yas tu viparyāsānugamān mṛṣātvam dharmāṇām
nāvagacchati | pratītyabhāvānāṁ svabhāvam abhiniviśate sa dharma-
ṣv idamsatyābhiniveśitayā 'bhinivi ¦ © ṣṭaḥ sat karmāṇy api karoti
samsāre pi samsa{|}rati viparyāsāvasthitatvāt* na bhavyo nirvāṇam
adhiga
[P_8r4] _ntum* | kim punar mṛṣāsvabhāvā api padārthāḥ samkleśa-
vyavadānanibandhanam bhavanti | bhavanti tadyathā māyāyu O
vatis tatsvabhāvānabhijñānāṁ tathāgatanirmita(ś)+opacitak(u)śala-
mūlānām* | uktam hi dṛḍhādhyāśayaparipṛcchāsūtre | O tadyathā
kulaputra māyākāranāṭake pratyupasthite {} māyākāranirmitām
striyan dṛṣṭvā kaścid rāga {}pa
[P 8r5] rītacetāḥ parṣacchāradyabhayenotthāyāsanād apakrāmet* | so
'pakramya iva striyam aśubhato manasi kuryād anityato
duḥkhata(ḥ) + + + + + + + + (si) kuryād iti vi .t. + () (v)inay(e) cạ
yantrakārakāritā yantrayuvatiḥ | □ sadbhūtayuvatiśūnyā sadbhūta-
yuvatirūpeṇa pratibhāsate | tasya {|} ca citrakarasya kāmarāgāspada-
bhūtā
[P_8r6] | tathā mṛṣāsvabhāvā api bhāvā bālānām samkleśavyavądāna-
nibandhanam* | tathārya({tathārya})ratnakūṭasū ¦ □ +e () + thạ khal+
+ + + + + + + + + + + +(i) bhagavato dha(rma) + + nām a(n)a(va) + +
+ + + + .. (m)ā(n)āny anadhimucya □ mānāni utthāyāsa .(e)bhyaḥ
prakrāntāni | atha bhagavān yena mārgeṇa te bhikṣavo gacchanti sma
tasmin*PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
[P 817] rgge dvau bhikṣū nirmimīte sma | atha tāni pañca bhikṣu .. .(ā)
+(i) + + tau dvau bhikṣū tenopa .am .(ā)manti s(m)a | (u)pa □ + + + +
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + .irmitakāv a(vo)cạtā(m) gamiṣyāv āv(ām).
.. (ny)āyata(n)eșu_tatra¹¹ 0 dhyānasakhaspa +śavi(hā) + r
.i(h)ariṣyāvaḥ || yam_hi bhagavān* dharman_deśayati tam āvām
nāvatarāvo nā ¦
339
[P 8v1] vagāhāvahe | nādhimucyāvahe | uttrasyāvaḥ samtras+(āv)aḥ
(s)ạm +rā(s)am āpadyāvahe | atha tāni pa(ñc)+ + +u O + + + + + + + +
+ + + + + + + + + + + (dh)ạrmą(d)eśạnāmn nāvatarāmo nāva(g)ā-
hāmahe nādhimucyāmahe uttrasyāmaḥ samtrasyāmaḥ¹² sa(m)-
trāsam + (p)ądyāmāhe | tena vayam apy araṇyāyataneṣu dhyāna-
sukhasparśavihārai(r) vihariṣyā
[P 8v2] maḥ | nirmitakāv avocatāṁ | tena hy āyuṣya(n)taḥ samgāsyām(o)
na vivādiṣyāmaḥ | avivādaparamo hi śra □ + + + + + + + + + + + + +
+ + + + .. (t). .. +(ocan)* (r)a(g)adveṣamo(h)ānām prahāṇāya vayam
pratipannāḥ nirmitakāv avocatām kim punar āyuṣmatām |
samvidyante rāgadveṣamohā yān* kṣayi¹³ṣyathaḥ | tāny avoca
43
4¹ tatra is followed by four small circles, arranged as 2 rows of 2 each (= i?)
42 An erased correction has been written in the upper margin after the string-hole
space. This correction appears to be composed of two corrections. The numeral ‘3’
visible at the end of the first correction must relate it to the correction that has been
made in line 3 (kṣyatha is vaguely visible in this erased marginal correction). Of the
directly following, i.e., second, marginal correction, only samtra is visible, although
the numeral '1' seems to have been written after this correction. akṣaras within the
text of line 1 have obviously been erased and rewritten to include the second
correction. The akṣaras cyāmahe | uttra ¦ □ syāmaḥ samtrasyāma are smaller (the
visarga is of normal size) and written more tightly than the following akṣaras,
perhaps indicating that these akṣaras had to be erased to fit in the omitted word
samtrasyāmaḥ.
3 pi?340
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
.44
[P 8v3] n* na te 'dhyātman na bahirdhā nobhayam antareṇopalabhyante
nāpi te 'parikalpitā utpadyante | nirmitakāv a □ vocatã+ tena hy
āyuṣyant(o) + + + + + + + + + yạtą | yṣ(dā) cā .(uªṣ). n. + + (lp)a-
yiṣ(y)atha | na vikalpayi .yatha | tadā na ramkṣyatha na vi ☐
ramkṣyatham*45 na rakto na viraktaḥ yaś ca sa sānta ity ucyante |
śīlam āyuṣmanto na samsarati na parinirvvāti |
[P 8v4] samadhiprajñāvimuktivimuktijñānadarśanam ayuṣmanto na
samsarati na parinirvāti ebhiś cãyuṣmanto dharmair nirvāṇam
śū(cy)ate | e(te) ca dha (r)mą śūn(y)āḥ prakṛtiviviktāḥ | prajahītaitām
āyuṣmanta{|}ḥ samjñām yaduta parinirvvāṇa ¦ m iti | mā ca
samjñāyāḥ samjñā kārṣ(t)a | mā ca samjñāyāḥ samjñā parijñāsista yo
hi samjñāyāḥ samjñām parijā
[P 8v5] nāti samjñāti samjñābandhanam evāsya tad bhavati samjñā-
vedayitanirodhasamāpattim āyuṣmantaḥ samā padyadhvam* |
samjñāvedayitanirodhasamāpattisamāpannasya {|} bhikṣor nasty
uttarikaraṇīyam iti vadāvaḥ atha te ☐ ṣām pañcānām bhikṣuśa-
tānāmm anupādāyāśravebhyaś cittāni vimuktā({|})ny abhūvan* | tāni
vimukta(c)i
[P 8v6] ttāni yena bhagavān tenopasamkrāntāni | upasamkramya
bhagavataḥ pādau śirobhir abhivandhyaikānte nya śīdan*
athāyuṣmān* subhūtis tā({})na_bhikṣūn etad evāvocat*
44 (dā) cā .(u) are written tightly here, indicating that the text has been corrected. An
unidentifiable erased correction appears to be written in the upper margin above the
corrected akṣaras.
45 An erased correction has been written in the upper margin after the string-hole
space (see the note to 8v1); the akṣaras kṣyatha and the numeral '3' following the
correction are visible. The akṣaras ᵒyi .yatha | tadā na ramkṣyatha na vi ■ ramkṣya-
tham* have been written tightly to fit in the correction.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
341
kutāyuṣmanto gatāḥ kuto vā āgatāḥ te 'vocan* na kvacid gama-
nāya na kutaścid āgamanāya | bhadanta subhūte bhagavatā dharmo
deśita(h) äha ko nāmāyu(ṣma)
46
[P 8v7] tām śāstā āhur yo notpanno na parinirvāsyati āha katham
yuṣmābhir ddharmaḥ śrutaḥ āhur na bandhāya na mokṣāya āha
kena yūyam vinītāḥ“ | āhur yasya na kāyo na cittam | āha katham
yūyam prayuktāḥ | āhur nāvidyāpra □ hāṇāya na vidyotpādanāya | āha
kasya yūyam śrāvakāḥ | āhur yena na prāptam nābhisambuddham* |
[P 9r1] āha ke ({yā}) yuṣmākam sabrahmacāriṇaḥh āhur ye ({tr})
traidhātuke nopavicaranti | ā({a})ha_kiyaccireṇāyu ṣmantaḥ
parinirvāsyanti āhur yadā tathāgatanirmitakāḥ parinirvvāsyanti āha
kṛtam yuṣmābhiḥ karaṇīyam | ā □ hur ahamkāramamakārapari-
jñānataḥ | āha kṣīṇā yuṣmākam {{}} kleśāḥ | āhur atyantakṣayāt
sarvadharm(ā)
[P 9r2] ṇām | āha dharṣito yuṣmabhir māraḥ | āhuḥ skandhamārānu-
palambhāt* | āha paricarito yuṣmābhiḥ¦ □ śāstā | āhur na kāyena na
vācā na manasā | āha visodhitā yuṣmābhir dakṣiṇīyabhūmiḥ | āhur
agrāhato 'pratigrā ¦ □ hataḥ | āha | uttīrṇṇor yuṣmābhiḥ sa{|}msāraḥ |
āhur anucchedato {|}'śāśvatatah āha pratipan(n)ā (yu)
[P 9r3] ṣmābhir dakṣiṇīyā bhūmiḥ āhuḥ sarvagrahavimuktitaḥ| āha
kimgāmina āyuṣmantaḥ | āhuḥ yamgā ¦ □ minas tathāgatanirmitāḥ | iti
hy ayuṣma{}taḥ subhūteḥ paripṛcchatas teṣāñ ca bhikṣūṇām visarja-
47
46
The visarga is inserted from below.
kimyac? What appears to be an anusvāra could be a wormhole. All other
anusvāras on folio 9r1 are written as open-centred circles. See, however, folio 9r3,
the first section, where kim is written exactly as it is here.342
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
yatām tasyām parṣadi aṣṭānām bhikṣūśatānām anupādā-
yāśravebhyaś cittāni virmuktāni | dvātrimśataś ca prāṇisahasrāḥ ¦
[P 9r4] ņām virajo vigatamala(m) dha(r)meșu dharmacakṣu visu-
ddham*ity evam mṛṣāsvabhāvābhyān tathāgatanirmitābhyām*
bhikṣubhyām pañcānām bhikṣuśat+ nām vya(v)adānaniban(dh)+ nam
kṛtam iti uktañ cāryavajramaṇḍāyām dhāraṇyām tadyathā mañju ¦
Ośrīḥ kāṇḍañ ca pratītya mathanīñ ca pratītya puruṣasya
hastavyāyāmam pratītya dhūmaḥ prādurbhavati
|
[P 9r5] agnir abhinirvartate sa cāgnisantātpor na {} kāṇḍasanniḥśrito
na araṇisanniśrito na puruṣahastav(y)āyāmasanniśritaḥ + + + ..
(m)ạ .. .ī(r) ạ .. dviparyāsamo(h)i .. (sy)ạ p(u)rusapudgalasyotpadyate
rāgaparidaho dveṣaparidaho mohaparidāhaḥ | sa ca paridaho
nādhyātma na bahi(r)ddhā nobhayam antareṇa (sth)itaḥ
[P 9r6] api tu mañjuśrīr yad ucyate moha {ā} iti tat* kena kā .. (n)eno
.yate {{}} moha iti | atyantamukto mañju □ ++++ +++++++
+ + + + + + (ka) + (khā) .. ñjuśr(ī)ḥ sarvadharmā idan dhāraṇīpadam
āha katham* bhagavann idan dhāraṇīpadam āha | narakā
mañjuśrīr bālapṛthagjanair asadviparyāsaviṭhapitāḥ ¦
[P 9r7] svavikalpasambhūtāḥ | āha | kutra bhagavan narakāḥ
samavasaranti bhagavān āha ākāśasa + + (s). (kr).48 +++++++
+ + + + + + + + + + (vi)ką (s)ambhūtā narakā uta svabhāva-
sambhūtāḥ āha | svavika lpenaiva bhagavan* sarvab(al)+
prthagjanā narakatiryagyoniyamalokam samjānanti te (c)āsatsamāro
48
It is impossible to judge from the microfilm if what appear to be the akṣaras sa
and kra have actually been written on this line or if they belong to a loose piece of
palm leaf mistakenly set here during the photographing session.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
49
[P 9v1] pena duṣkham vedanām vedayanti duşkham anubhavanti trisv
apy apāyeṣu yathā cāham bhagavan narakān paśyāmi (t)+ ■ .. ++++
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + (su)ptaḥ“ svapnāntaragato nạrą(k). + +
(m) ātmānam samjānī □ te | (s)a tatra kvathitāyām samp+aj(v)a³ºli-
tāyām anekapauruṣāyā(m) lo(ha)kumbhyā+ pra(kṣi) +t. (m). .. .. (s). ..
343
[P 9v2] tīvrām duḥkhām v(e)danām vedayet | sa tatra mānasam
paridā(h)am sañjānīyāt* uttrasana santrasa(n)ą + + + + + + + + +
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + | atha tasya
mitrajñātisālo(h)itāḥ (p). + + (cchey).ḥ kenai .. (t ta)vạ d+ḥkham
iti | są tān+ mitrạjñātisālohitān evam va
[P_9v3] det(*) nairayikam duḥkham anubhūtam* | sa tān ākrośet*
paribhāseta ahañ ca nāma nairayikan duhkham anu [ +++++ n cạ
m(e) + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + t(i) | a + + + + + + + + + +(ā)s
tam puruṣam evam* □ vadeyur mā bhair mā bhair bho puruṣa supto
hi tvan na tva(m ito) grh+(t)* (kva) +(i) (n ni) +ggatah tasya punar api
smr
te strīni
[P 9v4] tir utpadyeta supto ham abhūvam vitatham etan mayā pari-
kalpitam a{..}bhūtam iti sa punar api saumanasyam prati labhate
ta(dya)thā bha(g)ạ(v)a +++++++++ (n). (s). p+ah + + + + + (t)+
n. .. kągạtạm ātmānam samjānīyāt* |evam eva bhagavan* sa
+vabālapṛthagjanā asadrāgaparyavanaddhāḥ strīnimittam kalpayanti |
4⁹ The visarga is represented by three circles.
5⁰ There appears to be an erasure after jva.344
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
[P 9v5] mittań kalpayitvā tābhiḥ sārddham ramamāṇam ātmānam
samjānanti ({nti}) tasya bālapṛthagjanasyaivam bhavaty a ¦ © ham
puruṣa iyam strī mamaiṣā str(ī) || tasya t(e)na cchanda(rā)ga-
pa(ry)avasthitena cittena bhogaparyeṣṭau cittam krāmati sa tato ni O
dānam kalahavigrahavivādam sañjanayati | tasya praduṣṭendriyasya
vairaḥ sanjayate | sa tena vipa
[P 9v6] ryāsena kālagataḥ samāno bahūni kalpasahasrāṇi narakeșu
duḥkhām vedanām vedayamānam ātmā □ nam sañjānāti | tadyathā
bhagavan* tasya puruṣasya mitrajñātisālohitā evam vadanti mā bhair
mā bhair bho puruṣa su ¦ □ pto hi tvam na tvam ito gṛhāt* kutaścitan
nirggata iti evam eva bhagavan* buddhā bhagavantaś cittavi
[P 9v7] paryāsaviparyastānām satvānām evan dharmman deśayanti |
nātra strī na puruṣo na satvo na jīvo na puru ■ șo na pudgalo vitathā
ime sarvvadharmā asanta ime sarvadharmāḥ | viṭhapitā ime sarva-
dharmaḥ mayopamā ime sarvvadharmaḥ svapnopamā ime
sarvvadharmaḥ nirmmitopamā ime sarvvadharmaḥ dakacandropa-
mā ime
[P 9v8] sarvvadharmā iti vistaraḥ | ta imām tathāgatasya dharma-
deśanām śrutvā vigatarāgān* sarvvadharmān* pa syanti vigata-
doṣān sarvvadharmmān* paśyanti | vigatamohān sarvvadharmān*
paśyanti asvabhāvān* ānāvaraṇān* te ākāśasthitena cetasā
kālam kurvvanti | te kālagatāḥ samānā nirūpaviśeṣe nirvvāṇadhā
[P_10r1] tau parinirvānti | evam aham bhagavan narakān* paśyāmīti
uktañ cāryopāliparipṛcchāyām bhaya darśita nairayikam mePRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
345
satvasahasra samv5¹ejitu naike | na ca vidyati kaściha satvo yo cyutta
gacchati ghoram apāyam {|} na ca kāraka kāraṇa santī yehi kṛtā
asitomaravarśaḥ | kalpavaśena tu paśyati tatra kāyi pata"tanti apāyi ta
śastrāḥ citramanora
[P 10r2] masamñjitaśreṣtāḥ5³ | svarṇṇa{{}}vimāna jalanti manojñāḥ |
teṣv api kāraka nāstiha kaścit te pi ca sthapita kalpa vasena
kalpavaśena ca kalpitu lokaḥ samjñagraheṇa vikalpitu bālaḥ | so tra
graho 'graho 'sabhūto māyamarīcisamā hi vikalpā □iti tad evam
asvabhāvā bhāvāḥ svaviparyāsaviṭhapitā bālānām samklesahetavo
bhavanti samsāra iti
[P 10r3] sthitam yathā ca mṛṣāsvabhāvānām padārthānām samkle-
savyavadānahetutvam tathā madhyamakāvatārād vistareṇāva
śeyam | atrāha | yadi svataḥ parata{h} ubhayato 'hetutaś ca nāsti
bhāvānām utpādas tat katham avidyāpratyayāḥ samskārā i □ ty uktam
bhagavatā | ucyate | samvṛtir eṣā na tatvam | kim samvṛter vyavasthā
na vaktavyā idampratyayatāmātre
[P 10r4] ṇa samvṛteḥ siddhir abhyupagamyate | na tu pakṣacatuṣṭa-
yābhyupagamena svabhāvavādaprasangāt* | tasya ¦ © cāyuktatvāt* |
idampratyayatāmātrābhyupagame hi sati hetuphalayor anyonyāpekṣa-
tvān nāsti svābhāvikī siddhi © r iti nāsti sasvabhāvavādaḥ | ata
51 The v has been written over an erasure.
V
52
Three short vertical strokes are written over ta, apparently to indicate erasure.
53
The st here is strangely formed and an erasure precedes it. It looks as though the
scribe first wrote tt, noticed his mistake, erased the initial curved stroke for tt and
shaped the top of the akṣara to appear as ș but forgot to change the lower t to t.346
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
evoktam svayan kṛtam parākṛtam dvābhyām kṛtam ahetukam*
tākim*
[P_10r5] kair iṣya{|}te duḥkham tvayā tūktam pratītyajam iti | ihāpi
vakṣyati pratītya kārakam karma tam pratītya ca kā rakam
karmma pravarttate nā(ny)+ + + + +i +i .. .. ṇạ(m) i .i | (bh). + + + + ..
tā(v)a(nm)ātram evoktan tatrāyam dharmasanketoyadutāsmin*
satīdam bhavati | asyotpādād idam utpadyate | yadutāvidyāpratya-
{}yāḥ samskārapra
[P 10r6] tyayam vijñānam ityādi | atra kecit pa{i} 54re codayanti | anu-
tpannā bhāvā iti kim ayam* pramāṇajo +i+ + + +āpram(ā) ++++
+++++++ (sy). + (t)adevam vạ(kt)+ + + + + + + +i +im .aksanāni
kimviṣayāni kim svata {|} utpannāni kim parata {{}} ubhayato
'hetuto veti athāpramāṇajaḥ sa na (y)uktaḥ pramāṇā
[P 10r7] dhīnatvāt* prameyādhigamasya anadhigato hy a(rtho) na vinā
pramāṇ(ai)r adhigantum śakya .. + + + + +ā □ + + + + + + + + + + + +
+ + + + + + + + + + + ti na yuktą .. + + + + + + + + ti | yato vācāyam
ni ścayo bhavato (*)nutpannā ti bhavisya .i + + + + + + + + +
+ + + .i yathā cāyam t(e) niśca ¦
[P 10v1] yo 'nutpannāḥ sarvvadharmā iti tathaiva mamāpi sa +vva-
bhāvotpattir bhavi(ṣyati |) + + + + +i +i + +
+++++++++
++++++++++ + + + + + +ặ(rambh). (v)+ (y). +(thy). (m e)veti
santy apratisi{i}d³dhāḥ sarvabhāvā it{i}"y ucyate+yad(i)
54 The scribe wrote pari and "corrected" to pare.
55
The scribe wrote ᵒsiddhi and corrected to siddhāḥ.
56
A deletion mark is not visible; the palm leaf above ti is damaged.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
kaśc(i)n n(i)ścạy(o) nạmā + + + + (sa) pramā(ṇa)jo vā syād apramā-
(na)jo vā na tv asti kim kāraṇam ihā
347
[P 10v2] niscayasambhave sati syāt tatpratipakṣyas tadapekṣo niścayaḥ |
yadā tv aniścaya eva tāvad asmākam nāsti ¦ ....57 ku(t). (s t). +(V)+ +
+ + + + + + + + + + + + +
58tvät* khara
nasya
hrasvad(ī)rghatāvat* | ya(dā) vain niściya¦ □ (s.ā) ...(āv)ąs tadā
kasya prasiddhyartham* | pramāṇāni (pa)ri .. yiṣyāmaḥ | kuto vaiṣām
samkhyā lakṣaṇam vi
..
59
[P 10v3] ṣayo bhavisyati svataḥ parataḥ ubhyato vā samutpattir iti
sarvam etan na vaktavyam asmabhiḥ yady evan ni ścayo nặ(s)ti
(bh)ava(t)a(h) + + + + + + + + + + + + + 6¹m +(p). lạbhyate
bhavatā(m)6² + .. .. .. p(i) parato na dvābhyām nāpy ahetuto □ bhāvā
bhavantīti | ucyate | niścitam ida(m) vākya lokasya svaprasiddha-
yevopapattyā nāryāṇām kim khalv āryā ¦
[P_10v4] ṇām upapattir nāsti | kenaitad uktam asti vā nāsti6³ ceti |
paramārtho hy āryas tūṣṇībhāvas tataḥ kutas tatra prapañcasambhavo
57 Part of the palm leaf has broken off and shifted to the right, with the result that
more than two akṣaras appear to be missing here.
58
The following section of palm leaf has broken off and been placed back where it
belongs, but is upside down.
59 The inverted piece ends here.
60 The akṣara shapes suggest syāsyā; one of the syās may have been cancelled.
61
A second line of akṣaras written on the same inverted piece as mentioned above
begins here.
62 The inverted piece ends.
63 An unreadable correction has been written and then erased in the upper margin
above kenaitad uktam asti vā nāsti. The akṣaras of kenaitad uktam asti vā nāsti are
smaller and written more tightly than the surrounding akṣaras, indicating that this
was the area of erasure and correction.348
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
ya ta upapattir anupa{|}patti(r) vā syặt* | yạ(di) hy ạ +yạ u .. pạttin
n. vạ .ṇnạyạnti k. na khalv i{|}dān(īm) paramārtham lokam bodhayi-
syanti | na kha ¦ © lv āryā lokasa{|}vyavahāreṇopapattim varṇṇayanti
kin tu lokata eva yā prasiddhopapattis tām parāvabodhārtham a
[P 10v5] bhyupetya tayaiva lokam bodhayanti | yathaiva hi vi-
dya{ }mānām api śarīrāsucitām viparyāsānugatā rāgino!
nopalabhyante śubhākārañ cābhūtam adhyāropya parikliśyante
teṣām vairāgyārthan tathāgatanirmmito devo vā śubhasamjñayā prāk
pra □cchāditān* kāyadoṣānupavarṇnayet santy asmin* kāye keśā
ityādinā te ca tasyāḥ śubhasamjñāyā vigamā
[P 10v6] d vairāgyam āsādayeyuḥ | evam ihāpy āryaiḥ sarvvathāpy
anupalabhyamānātmakam bhāvānām avidyātimiropahata mati-
nayanatayā viparītam svabhāvam adhyāropya kvacid ye kecid
viseṣam atitarām parikliśyanti pṛthagjanāḥ tān idānīm āryā s
tatprasiddhyaivopapattyā paribodhayanti | yathā vidyamānasya
ghaṭasya na mṛdādibhya utpāda ity abhyupeta
[P 10v7] m evam utpādānu pūrvvam vidyamānasya ghatasya vidya-
mānatvān nāsty utpāda ity avaśīyatām | yathā ca parabhūte{|}bhyo ¦ □
jvālāngārādibhyo 'nkurasyotpattir nāstīty abhyupetam evam
vivakṣitebhyo pi bījādibhyo nāstīty avaśīyatām | athāpi syād anu¦ □
bhava eso 'smākam iti etad apy ayuktam* yasmād anubhava eșa
mṛṣā ’nubhavatvā{t}t taimirikadvicandrādya ¦
[P 11r1] nnabhavavad iti tataś cānubhavasyāpi sādhyasamatvāt tena
pratyavasthānam na yuktam iti | tasmād anutpannā bhāvā i¦ □ ty
evam tāvad viparītasvarūpādhyāropapratipakṣeṇa prathamaprakara-PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
349
ṇārambhaḥ | idānīm kvacid yaḥ kaścid viśeṣo dhyāropita ¦ □ s tadvise-
ṣāpākaraṇārtham seṣaprakaraṇārambhaḥ| gantrgantavyagamanādiko
pi niravaseṣo višeṣo nāsti pratītya
[P 11r2] samutpādasyeti pratipādanārtham| atha syād eșa eva
pramāṇaprameyavyavahāro laukiko 'smabhiḥ śāstreṇā ¦ □ nuvarṇnita
iti | tadanuvarṇṇanasya tarhi phalam vācyam | kutārkikaiḥ sa nāsito
viparītalakṣaṇābhidhānena tasyāsmābhiḥ □ samyaglakṣaṇam uktam
iti ced etad apy ayuktam* | yadi hi kutārkikair viparītalakṣaṇa-
pranayanam kṛtam na la
[P 11r3] kṣye vaiparītyam lokasya syāt tadartham prayatnasāphalyam
syān na caitad evam iti vyartha evāyam prayatna iti | api ca □ yadi
pramāṇādhīnaḥ prameyādhigamas tāni pramāṇāni kena paricchi-
dyanta ityādinā vigrahavyāvarttanyām vihito doṣas tada □ parihārāt*
samyaglakṣaṇadyotakatvam api nāsti | kiñ ca yadi svasāmānyalakṣa-
nadvayānurodhena pramāṇadva
[P 11r4] yam uktam yasya tal lakṣaṇadvayam kim tal lakṣam asti atha
nāsti yady asti tadā param prameyam astīti katham pramā¦ ©
nadvayam* atha nāsti lakṣyan tadā lakṣaṇam api nirāśrayam nāstīti
katham pramāṇadvayam vakṣyati hi | lakṣaṇāsampravṛttau ca na
lakṣyam upapadyate lakṣyasyānupapattau ca lakṣaṇasyāpy
asambhava iti | atha syān na lakṣyate 'neneti lakṣaṇam*
[P 11r5] kin tarhi kṛtyalyutor bahulam iti karmaṇi lyuṭam kṛtvā lakṣyate
tad iti lakṣaṇam | evam api tenaiva tasya lakṣyamāṇa
tvāsambhavād yena tal lakṣyate (t)a .. karaṇa + ką(r)mą .. (r).(ā) .. ++
+ .. va doṣaḥ atha syāt(*) jñānasya karaṇatvāt tasya ca svalakṣaṇa350
ntarbhāvād ayam adoṣa iti | ucyate | iha bhāvānām anyāsādhāraṇam
ātmīyam yat svarūpam tat svalakṣaṇam tadya
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
[P 11r6] thā pṛthivyāḥ kāṭhinyam vedanāyā anubhavo yāvad vijñānasya
viṣayam prati vijñaptis tena hi tadvān* lakṣyata iti ☐ kṛtvā
prasiddhyanugatā+ + + + +i .. .. .. y. .. .. + + (nam). bhyupagacchatā
vijñānasya ca karaṇabhāvam pratipadyamānenedam u ☐ ktam
bhavati () svalakṣaṇasyaiva kar(m)atā svalakṣaṇāntarasya karaṇa-
bhāvas ceti tatra yadi vijñānasvalakṣaṇam karaṇam
[P 11r7] tasya vyatiriktena karmmaṇā bhavitavyam iti (s)a eva doṣaḥ|
atha syād yat (p)+ (th)i(vyā) +i .ạtạm (k)ā(th)i .ā +i tạm +i .ā(n)ại
gamyam +++++++ +++++++ + + .. vạm tarhi .i+++ ..
kṣaṇasya karmatvābhāvāt* prameyatvam na syāt* karmarū-
pasyaiva svalakṣa(n)asya prameyatvāt* | ta + .a dvividham prameyam
svalakṣaṇam sāmānyalakṣaṇañ cety etad vi
[P 11v1] śeṣya vaktavyam kiñcit* svalakṣaṇam prameyam ya(1 1)akṣyata
ity evam vyapadiśyate | kiñcid aprameyam yal lakṣya(t)e' .... (ti) ¦ ■
(to) 64 (yathā) + ++
+++(n). .. .. (pa) +i .. Ipanā ' D (y)ā(m). .i++5 +++++++++
+ + + +i + s(t)i tataḥ s(v)asamvittyā grahaṇāt* karmmatāyām sa
++++++++ ++++ + + + + + + .1 ..
64
te | ?
65
The visible vowel is e or o.
[P 11v2] tyām asty eva prameyāntarbhāva iti | ucyate | vistar+ na
(m)adhyamakāvatāre svasamvittiniṣedhāt* svalakṣaṇam sva ¦ +++
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + .. (ti) + ..
..PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
351
ṇāsiddham asambhavā □ (1 la)kṣyābhāve nirāśrą(y)+ + + + + + +++
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + (h) | tạthā cok.am āryaratnacū
[P 11v3] daparipṛcchāyām sa cittam samanupaśyan* cittadhārām
paryeșate kutaścit tasyautpattir iti {} tasyaivam bhavati āla □ mbane
sati cittạ+ sạ(m)utpạ ..+++++++ .bạnạm. .. +++ (th)ạ (y)? + ++
+ + + (d)+ va citta. yadi tāvad anyac (c)ālambanam anyac cittam
tadā dvicittatā bhavisyati | atha yad evālambanan tad e(v)a cittan tạt
kathañ c+ tt+ na citta+ sạmanupa(sy)ạti | na ca cittam*
[P 11v4] cittam samanupaśyati tadyathāpi nāma tayaivāsidhārayā
saivāsidhārā na śakyate chettum na tenaivāngulyagreṇa tad evangu-
lya gram śakyate sprastum evam eva na ten(ai)va (c)itte .. tad eva
.. + + kya+ drastum tasyaivam yonisaḥ prayuktasya yā cittasyānava-
sthātā nocchedaśāśvatatā na kūṭasthatā nāhetukī na pratyaya-
viruddhā na tato nānyato na saiva nānya tā. cittadhā ¦
la ¦
[P 11v5] rām cittalatām cittadharmmatām cittānavasthitatām ci-
ttāpradhāratām | cittadṛśyatañ cittasvalakṣaṇatān tathā □ jānāti tathā
paśyati yathā tathatañ ca na virodhayati | tañ ca cittavivekatām tathā
prajānāti tathā paśyati iyam ku laputra citte cittānupaśyanā smṛ-
tyupasthānam iti tad evam nästi svasamvittis tadabhāvāt* kim kena
[P 11v6] kṣyate | kiñ ca bhedena vā tal lakṣyaṇam lakṣyāt syād abhedena
vā tatra yadi tāvan bhedena tadā lakṣyād bhinnatvād alakṣaṇa val
lakṣaṇam api na tal lakṣaṇam* lakṣaṇāc ca bhinnatvād alakṣyaval
lakṣyam api na lakṣyam* tathā lakṣyād bhinnatvāl lakṣaṇasya lakṣa352
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
nanirapekṣyam lakṣyam syāt tataś ca na tal lakṣyam lakṣaṇa-
nirapekṣatvāt* khapuṣpavat* | athābhinne {|} lakṣya ¦
[P 11v7] lakṣaṇe tadā lakṣaṇā{{}}d_avyatiriktatvāl lakṣaṇasvātmavad
vihiyate lakṣyasya lakṣyatā lakṣyāc cāvya tiriktatvāl lakṣya-
svātmaval lakṣaṇam api na kṣaṇasvabhāvam* | yathoktam | lakṣyā
lakṣaṇam anyac cet*6 syāt tal lakṣyam alakṣaṇam* | tayor abhāvo
'nanyarthe vispastam kathitam tvayeti na ca vină tattvonyatvena
lakṣya({ksy})kṣaṇasiddhāv anyā
[P 12r1] gatir asti | tathā ca vakṣyati | ekībhāvena vā siddhir nānābhāvena
vā yayoḥ | na vidyate tayoḥ siddhiḥ katham ¦ □ na khalu vidyata iti |
athāvācyatayā siddhir bhaviṣyatīti cen naitad evam avācyatā hi nāma
parasparavibhāgaparijñā □ nābhāve sati bhavati | yatra ca
vibhāgaparijñānam nästi tatredam lakṣaṇam idam lakṣyam iti
viseṣataḥ pariccheda
[P 12r2] sambhave sati dvayor apy abhāva eveti | tasmād avācyatayāpi
nāsti siddhiḥ api ca yadi vijñānam karaṇam vi □ ṣayasya paricchede
kaḥ karttā na karttāram67 antareṇāsti karaṇādīnām sambhavas
chidikriyāyām iva | atha cittasya tatra katṛtvam parika □ lpyate tad
api na yuktam yasmād arthamātradarśane cittasya vyāpāro 'rthaviseșe
caitasānām | tatrārthadṛṣṭivi
66
t* is inserted from below.
67 A kākapada, the correction na ca karttā, and then the number ‘2’ have been
written and subsequently erased in the upper margin above this word. An insertion
mark has been written after ᵒtā in the word karttāram of the text. The akṣaras
paricchede kaḥ karttā na karttā are written more tightly and smaller than the sur-
rounding akṣaras to include the correction. It would appear that the scribe forgot to
add ca in his corrected text.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
353
[P 12r3] jñānan tadviseṣe tu caitasā ity abhyupagamāt* ekasyām hi
pradhānakriyāyām sādyāyām yathāsvam guṇapradhā □ nabhāve-
nāṁgībhāvopagamāt* syāt karaṇādīnāṁ karaṇāditvam na (ce)ha
jñānavijñānayor ekā pradhānakriyā kin tarhy arthamātrapari
cchittir jñānasya pradhānakriyā vijñānasya tv arthaviśeṣapariccheda
iti nāsti vijñānasya karaṇatvam nāpi
[P 12r4] cittasya kartṛtvam tataś ca sa eva doṣaḥ atha syād anātmānaḥ
sarvadharmā ity agamāt kartuḥ sarvatrābhāvāt* karttāram anta-
reṇāpi vidyata eva kriyādivyavahāra iti | etad api nās(t)i āgamasya
samyagarthānavadhāraṇāt* | etac coktam madhyamakāvatāre
athāpi syād yathā śilāputrakasya śarīram rāhoh sira iti śarīra-
sirovyati
[P 12r5] riktaviśeṣaṇāsambhave pi viśeṣaṇaviṣeṣyabhāvo ({sti})sty evam
prthivyāḥ svalakṣaṇam iti svalakṣaṇavya □ tiriktapṛthi(v)yasambhave
pi .. viṣyatīti | naitą .e + + + + + ++++++++++++ dipāṇyādimat
sahābhā¦ 0 vipadārthāntarasāpekṣatāpravṛttau śarīraśiraḥ-
śabdamātrālambano buddhyupajananaḥ sahacāripadārthān.a
[P 12r6] rasyakāńkṣā eva varttate kasya śarīram kasya śira iti | itaro pi
viseṣaṇā .. rasambandhanirācikī¦ □ rṣa(yā) +i++++++++++++
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + ☐ ha tu
kāṭhinyādivya(t)i(r)ik.ap. (th)iv(y)ā(dy). + + + + .i + .i + + .i ..
(sya)bhāvah... (th)ikair vyati ¦
..
[P 12r7] riktalakṣyābhyupagamāt tadanurodhena viśe(ṣ)ṣṇābhidhānạm
ad+ .. m i(t)i na ce + + + + + + + + + (par)ikąlpi □ + + + + + + + + +
+++++++++++++ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +0354
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
prajñaptivat svaśarīropādānąsyą (śi) + +(u) +rạ kạ(syo)pādātu +1(au)-
k(i)kavyavah(ārāṁgabhūtasya vi)śeṣa(n)asyāvi
[P 12v1] cāraprasiddhasya sadbhāvāt* śira upādānasya ca rāhor upa(d)ā
.(u). (s)ad.ā .ād ạ(yu) + + + + + (r). nạ+ () (ś). rīra(śi) .. [++++++
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +
+ vicārā(pr)ą □ vṛtter avicārataś ca lau +i + + + + + + + + + + + + + +
+ + + + + + + + + ryamāṇa ā ¦
[P 12v2] tmā na sambhavati api ca lokasamvṛtyā skandhān upādā-
yāsyāstitvam evam rah(u)śilāputrakay(o)r apīti nāsti □nid. ++ +++
+++ k+ nạ ca
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +++
+
lakṣaṇam*
nirāśrayam tathāpi samvṛtir (e)ṣeti paraspa-
rāpekṣāmatra(y)ā (si) .. .. .. .avastha(p)aya+ babhūvu(r) ā .āryāḥ
[P 12v3] avaśyam caitad evam abhyupeyam | anyathā hi samvṛtir
upapattyā na viyujyet* | .adā tattvam (e)va syān .a samvṛtiḥ | na co
papatyā vicāryamā ā ā+ .. .(ā)putrṣkādīnā{{}}m+ vā(s)ambhavah
(kin) tą +(hi) + + +ā .. (yā) + + .(ū) .. (ve)dạnādīnām api nāsti
tạ
sambhava iti teṣām api samvṛtyā śilāputrasyevāstitvam āstheyam
syān na caitad evam ity asad etat* atha ¦
|
[P 12v4] syāt kim anayā sūkṣmekṣikayā naiva hi vayam sarvam amum
pramāṇaprameyavyavahāram satyam ity acakṣmahe kin tu lo
kaprasiddhir eṣā 'munā nyāyena vyavasthāpyata iti | ucyate | vayam
apy evam brumaḥ kim anayā sūkṣmekṣikayā laukike vyavahāre Ⓒ
'vatāritayā tiṣṭhatu tāvad eṣā viparyāsamātrāsāditātmabhāvasattākā
samvrtir mumukṣāṇām mokṣāvā!PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
[P 12v5] hakakuśalamūlopacayahetur yāvan na tatvādhigama iti
bhavāms tv enām samvṛtiparamārthasatyavibhāgadurvi □ dagdha-
buddhitayā kvacid upapattim avatāryānyāyato nāśayati | s(o) 'ham
samvṛtisatyavyavasthāvaicakṣaṇyāl laukika eva pakṣe sthitvā
vinivarttayan* lo-
samvṛtyekadeśanirākaraṇopakṣiptopapatyantareṇa
kavṛddha iva lokācarāt pa ¦
355
[P_12v6] {tya}6ribhrasāmānam bhavantam eva nivarttayāmi no tu
samvṛtim* tasmad yadi laukiko vyavahāras tadāvaśyam lakṣaṇa-
val lakṣyeṇāpi bhavitavyan tataś ca sa eva doṣaḥ | atha paramārthas
tadā lakṣyābhāval lakṣaṇadvayasyāpy utpattir nāstīti kutaḥ
☐
pramāṇadvayaṁ | atha śabdānām evam kriyākārakasambandhapūrvi-
kā vyutpattir nangīkriyate tad idam a
[P 12v7] tikaṣṭam tair eva kriyākārakasambandhapravṛttaiḥ śabdair
bhāva{|}n* vyavaharati śabdārtham {|} kriyākaraṇādikañ ca ne¦ □
cchatīti aho batecchāmātraprati"baddhapravṛttitā bhavataḥ | yadā
caivam prameyadvayam avyavasthitan tadā sāmānyalakṣaṇavi:
sayatvenāgamader nāpramāṇāntaratvam* kiñ ca ghataḥ pratyakṣa ity
evamādikasya laukikavyavahārasyā
[P 13r1] samgrahād āryavyavahārābhyupagamāc cāvyāpitā lakṣaṇasyeti
na yuktam etat* atha syad ghaṭopādānam nīlādayaḥ pratyakṣāḥ
pratyakṣapramāṇaparicchedātvāt tataś ca yathaiva kāraṇe kāryopacā-
ram kṛtvā buddhānām sukham utpāda iti vyupadiśyate e vam
68
Two short strokes above the akṣara indicate the deletion.
69
5⁹ opratirbaddhaᵒ?356
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
pratyakṣanīlādinimittako pi ghataḥ karane kāryopacāram kṛtvā
pratyakṣa iti vyapadiśyate | naivamvi ¦
[P_13r2] dhe viṣaye upacāro yuktaḥ | utpādo hi loke sukhavyatireke-
ṇopalabdhaḥ sa ca saṁskṛtalakṣaṇasvabhāvatvād a¦ □ nekaduḥkha-
satahetutvād asukha eva sa sukha iti vyupadiśyamāno 'sambaddha
evety evamvidhe viṣaye yukta upacāraḥ (gh)aṭaḥ pratya □ kṣa ity atra
tu na hi ghato nāma yo 'pratyakṣaḥ pṛthag upalabdho yasyopacārāt
pratyakṣatvam syāt* nīlādivyati
[P 13r3] riktasya ghaṭasyābhāvād aupacārikaṁ pratyakṣatvam iti ced
evam api sutarām upacāro na yukta upacaryamāṇasyāśraya-
syābhāvāt* | na hi kharaviṣāṇne taikṣṇyam upacar(y)ate | api ca
lokavyavahārāngabhūto ghato yadi nīlādi vyatirikto nāstīti kṛtvā
tasyopacārikam pratyakṣatvam parikalpyate | nanv evam sati prthi-
vyādivyatirekena nī
[P 13r4] lādikam api nāstīti nīlāder aṣyaucārikam pratyakṣatvam
kalpyatām| yathoktam rūpādivyatirekeṇa ya thā kumbho na
vidyate vāyvādivyatirekeṇa {|} tathā rūpan na vidyata iti | tas.ād
evamādikasya lokavyavahārasya lakṣaṇenāsamgrahād avyāpitaiva
lakṣaṇasyeti | tatvavidapekṣayā hi pratyakṣatvam ghaṭādīnām
nīlādīnāñ ca neṣya ¦
[P 13r5] te lokasamvṛtyā tv abhyupagantavyam eva pratyakṣatva(m)
ghaṭādīnām* | api cāparokṣārthavācitvāt pratyakṣa śabda-
syākṣ(ā)bhi(mu) .. (r).(h) prạtigạtam akṣam asmi(n)+ i(t)i .. (tvā gh). +
+ + + + + + + + + + (ty)ąkṣatvam siddham bhavati ta tPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
357
paricchedakasya jñānasya tṛṇatuṣāgnivat pratyakṣakāraṇatvāt pratya-
kṣatvam vyapadiśyate yas tv akṣam akṣam pra
[P_13r6] ti vartata iti pratyakṣaśabdam vyutpā({da})yati tasya
jñānasyendriyāviṣayatvād viṣa(y)aviṣayitvāc ca (n)a yuktā □ vyut(p)ą
+i + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + ++++++
sya pațuma.. □ tānuvidhānād vijñānānā(m) tądvikāravikāritvād
āś(r)ayeṇai .a .. (p)ade(śo) bha(v)ạti cakṣurvijñānam iti | e
..
[P 13r7] (va)(m) yady apy artham artham prati varttate tathāpy akṣam
akṣam ā(ś)+i .. rttamānam vijñā .. + + yeṇa (vy)apade ++++
+ + na
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +
tulyan ta □ tra hi viṣayeṇa vijñā + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +
+++++++ (do) nopadarśi
[P 13v1] (t).h syāt* manovijñānasya cakṣurādivijñānaiḥ sahaika-
viṣayṣpravṛttatvāt* | tathā hi nīlādiviṣayaṣaṭka ¦ ■ + + + + + + + + + +
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + āśrayeṇa tu
vyapade se manovijñānasya cakṣurādivijñānaviṣayapravṛtti ++++
+ + spa(r)+ + + + + (bh)avati iha tu pramā ¦
[P 13v2] ṇalakṣaṇavivakṣayā kalpanāpoḍhamātrasya pratyakṣatvābhyu-
pagame sati savikalpakād iva tadviseṣasyā □ bhimatatvād asādha +
+ + (r)a(ne)na vyapad+ ś(e) są + + (kiñci)t prạ + + + + .. (1)ạ .. .. () +
71
+ + (p)+ +7¹ tantrāyāñ ca pramāṇa □ samkhyāpravṛttau prame-
70 sam?
7¹ The akṣara ra and part of another erased akṣara are covered by a palm-leaf frag-
ment.358
yākārānukāritāmātratayā ca samāsāditātmabhāvasattākayoḥ pramā-
nayo
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
[P 13v3] ḥ svarūpasya vyavasthāpanān nendriyeṇa vyapadeśaḥ kiñcid
upakarotīti sarvathā viṣayeṇaiva vyapadeśonyāyyaḥ loke pratya-
kṣaśabdasya prasiddhatvād vivakṣite 'rthe pratyartham iti vāprasi-
ddhatvād aśrayeṇai(va) vyutpattir āśrīyata iti cet* | ucyate | asty
ayam pratyakṣaśabdo lokaprasiddhaḥ sa tu yathā loke tathāsmābhir
ucyate eva yathā!
[P 13v4] sthitalaukikapadārthatiraskāreṇa tu tadvyutpäde kriyamāṇe
prasiddhaśabdatiraskāropi syāt tataś ca pra tyartham ity eva syāt*
ekasya ca cakṣurvijñānasyai”kaindriyakṣaṇāśrayasya pratyakṣatvam
na syād vīpsārthābhāvāt* | ekaikasya ca pra tyakṣatvābhāve bahū-
nām api na syāt* | kalpanapoḍhasyaiva ca jñānasya pratyakṣatvābhyu-
pagamāt tena ca lokasya sam
[P_13v5] vyavahārābhāvāt* | laukikasya ca pramāṇaprameyasya vyā-
khyātum iṣṭatvād vyarthaiva pratyakṣapramāṇaka □ Ipanā samjayate
| cakṣur vijñānasamangī nīlam jānāti no tu n(ī)lam iti cāgamasya
pratyakṣalakṣaṇābhidhānasyāprastuta ¦ □ tvāt pañcānām indriyavijñā-
nānām jaḍatvapratipādakatvāc ca nāgamād api kalpanāpoḍhasyaiva
vijñā
[P 13v6] nasya pratyakṣatvam iti na yuktam etat* | tasmāl loke yadi
lakṣyam {{}} yadi vā lakṣaṇam svasāmānyalakṣaṇam vā sarvam
eva sākṣād upalabhyamānatvād aparokṣam ataḥ pratyakṣam vyava-
sthāpyate tadviṣayeṇa jñānena saha dvicandrādīnān tv ataimiri-
72 ye?PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
359
kajñānāpekṣayā 'pratyakṣatvam* taimirikādyapekṣayā tu pratyatvam
evā parokṣavisa
[P 13v7] yan tu jñānam sādhyāvyabhicārilingotpannam anumānam*
sākṣād atīndriyārthavivādām āptānām yad vacanam sa āgamaḥ |
sādṛśyād ananubhūtārthādhigama upamānam {ḥ} gaur iva gavaya iti
yathā tad evam pramāṇacatuṣṭayāl lokasyā □rthādhigamo vyava-
sthāpyate tāni ca parasparapekṣayā sidhyanti | tasmāl laukikakṣam
evāstu yathādṛṣṭam i ¦
[P 14r1] ty alam prasangena prastutam eva vyakhyāsyāmaḥ73 | laukika
eva darśane sthitvā buddhānām bhagavatān dharmadeśanā et u
pamābhi nidarśana vakṣye kin tu n{a}a teṣ{a}a samo iha kaścit*
paṇḍitavijñajanā ////
[P 14r2] natimiraghnasya jñānalokasya te mane na ravir viṣaye bhūmim
khadyotīm api vindatītyādi | atrāhu □ ḥ svayūthyāḥ | yad idam uktan
na svata utpadyante bhāvā iti tad yuktam svata utpattivaiy ////
[P 14r3] cyate nāpi parata iti tad ayuktam yasmāt parabhūtā eva74
bhagavatā bhāvānām utpādakā nirdiṣṭaḥ ||° || catvāraḥ □ pratyayā
hetur ārambaṇam anantaram* | tathaivādhipateya(ñ ca)¹5 pratyayo
nāsti pañcamah | tat+ạ (n)ir .. ////
73
A syā, with the numeral '1' beside it and a kākapada immediately below, has been
written in and later erased from the upper margin above vyākhyāsyāmaḥ. The
akṣaras vyākhyāsyā are written tightly in the text, indicating that the original text
was erased at this point to allow for inclusion of the correction.
74
Ievam?
75 In the upper margin the correction teya and then the line-indicating numeral ‘3’
have been written and subsequently erased. The akṣaras vādhipateya(ñ ca) of the
text have been written more tightly and smaller than the surrounding akṣaras,360
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
[P_14r4] tasyārambaṇapratyayaḥ | kāraṇasyānantaro_nirodhaḥ {|}
kāryasyotpattipratyayas tadyathā bījasyānantaro niro dho" ankura-
syotpadapratyayaḥ | yasmin sati yad bhavati tat tasyādhipateyam i ////
[P 14r5] dhārayanti pratyayo nāsti pañcama iti | tasmād ebhyaḥ para-
bhūtebhyo bhāvānām utpattir asti parata u tpattir iti atrocyąte
naiva hi.. (vānā) .. + + +e(bhyah) pratya .. + ////
[P 14r6] (tes)+ pratyayeṣu samasteṣu vyasteṣu vyastasamasteṣu hetu-
pratyayasāmagryām anyatra vā kvacid bhāvānām kā □ryā(ṇā).... ////
[P 14r7] + + + bhavanam bhāva utpādaḥ | parebhya utpādaḥ pa .. (bhā)
.(h).. na vidyate tasmād ay+ k(t)ạm eta(t p.) .. ////
[P 14v1] +u+t+ (yoh) parasparāpekṣam paratvam na caivam bījānku-
ra{}yor yaugapadyam tasmad avidyamāne {.}svabhāve ka +ya □ ////
[P 14v2] g evopavarṇnitaḥ tad evam pratyayebhya utpādavādini prași-
ddhe kriyāta utpādavādī manyate na cakṣū ¦ □ rūpādṣ(ya)ḥ .. t+ + + +
+++ + + + .. nạja(ni) + .. ////
[P 14v3] cyate || 0 || kriyā na pratyayavatī | yadi kriyā kācit syāt* sā
cakṣurādibhiḥ pratyayaiḥ pratyayava □ tī vijñānam janayet* | na tv
asti katham kṛtvā iha kriy(e)yam i(s)yamāṇā ////
indicating that the original text must have been erased and rewritten to include the
correction.
76
dho is written in the space to the left of the beginning of the line. It is formed in an
unusual way and has likely been written by a second hand (possibly, but not
necessarily, the proofreader's).PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
361
[P 14v4] rttrā vinā janir iyam na ca yuktarūpetyādivacanāt* jāyamāne pi
bhāve kriyā na sambhavati jātājāta vyatirekeṇa jāyamānābhāvāt*
yathoktam* | jāyamānorddhajātatvāj jā(ya) .. .. ////
[P 14v5] vāha kriyā na pratyayavatīti viśeṣaṇam nāsti na višeṣyam
ityādinā pratipāditam etan madhyama ¦ □ kāvatāre | na hi vandhyāpu-
tro gomān ity ucyate yady evam apratyayavatī tarhi bh ////
[P_14v6] n(t)+ mayaḥ pato na yukta iti vīraṇamayo 'byupagamyate |
tasmāt kriyā na bhāvajanikā | atrāha ¦ □ yady evam kriyāyā asambha-
vaḥ pratyayās tarhi janakā bhaviṣyanti bhāvānām iti ////
[P 14v7] + + + +'
+ + +77 iti ucyate | kriyāvantaś ca santy uta neti
prakṛtenābhisambandhaḥ utaśabdo 'trāvadhāra ne tatra kriyāyā
abhāva uktaḥ | katham kriyāvatvam pratyayānām iti | yathā ca +(i) ////
[P 15r1] dhānam arthaśūnyam atrāha | kin na etena kriyāvantaḥ pratyaya
ityādivicāreṇa yasmāc cakṣurādīn* ({ni}) pratītya pratyayan*
vijñānādayo bhāvā jāyante tasmãc cakṣurādīnām pratyayatvam
tebhyas cotpado vijñānādīnām iti | eta □d apy ayuktam ity āha ||
utpadyate pratītyemān itīme pratyayāḥ78 kila {{}}| yāvan notpadyata
ime tāvan nāpratya ¦
[P 15r2] yāḥ katham | yadi cakṣurādīn(*) pratyayān* pratītya vijñānam
utpadyata ity asyeme pratyayā ucyante nanu yāva ¦ □t tad vijñā-
nākhyam kāryam notpadyate tavad ime cakṣurādayaḥ kathan
nāpratyayāḥ | apratyayā evety abhiprāyaḥ | na cāpratyayebhya u
77 The first four akṣaras are covered by a piece of palm leaf that has curled back over
them.
78
The visarga is written above the main line.362
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
tpattiḥ sikatābhyas tailasya atha matam pūrvam apratyayāḥ santaḥ
kincid anyam pratyayam apekṣsya pratyayatvam prati
[P 15r3] padyanta iti | etad apy ayuktam yat tat pratyayāntaram
apratyayasya pratyayatvena kalpyate tad api pratyayatve sa ty asya
pratyayo bhavatīti tatrāpy eṣaiva cinteti na yuktam etat* | kiñ ceheme
cakṣurādayo vijñānasya pratyayāḥ kalpyama naḥ sato vã 'sya
kalpyerann asato vā sarvvathā ca na yujyata ity āha || º || naivāsato
naiva sataḥ pratya
[P 15r4] yo 'rthasya yujyate | kasmād ity āha | asataḥ pratyayaḥ kasya
sataś ca pratyayena kim* | asato hy arthasyāvi dyamānasya katham
pratyayaḥ syāt* bhaviṣyatā vyapadeśo bhavisyatīti cen naivam*
bhaviṣyatā ced vyapadeśa istaḥ śaktim vi nā nāsti hi bhävitā
'syetyādinoktadoṣatvāt* | sato pi vidyamānasya labdhaja{{ } }nmano
nisphalaiva pra
[P 15r5] tyayakalpanā | evam samastānām pratyayānām ({}) kāryotpā-
danāsāmarthyenāpratyayatvam udbhāvyātaḥ param vyastānām
apratyayatvam pratipādyate | atrāha | yady apy evam pratyayānām
asambhavas tathāpy asty eva lakṣaṇ(o)padeśāt pratyayaprasi ¦
ddhiḥ | tatra nirvarttako hetur iti lakṣaṇam ucyate hetupratyayasya na
cāvidyamānasya lakṣaṇopadeśo ¦
[P 15r6] yukto vandhyāsutasyeveti | ucyate | syād dhetupratyayo yadi
tasya lakṣaṇam syāt* ||° || yasmāt* | na san nā □ san na sadasan
dharmo +ir+ar(tt)\a\'te yadā | kathạm +ir+artta(k)o (he)tu evam sati .i
+ + + () + + +i(r)+ + + (utp)ādako yadi nirvartyo □ dharmo nirvarteta
79 tya?PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
tam utpādako hetur utpā + (ye)n (n)a (tu) nirvarttate sadasadubhaya-
rūpasya nirvartyasyābhā
[P 15r7] ++ () tatra san na nirvartyate vidyamanatvāt* | asann apy
avidyamānatvāt* sadasann api parasparavi(ru)ddhạ ¦ □ + + + + + + +
+++++++++++++ + pratyay+ (s)u(s)a(ttv)a(vi)8⁰
..
363
+++
+ + (n)āsti tataś ca yad uktam lakṣaṇasambhavād vidyate
hetupratyaya iti tad evam sati na yujyate | idānīm ārambaṇapratyayani
..
[P 15v1] + + rtham āha || º || anārambaṇa evāyam saddha(r)ma upa(di) ..
athanarambane dha +me kuta ārambaṇa+ punaḥ □ + + + + + +
(dh)ạ +(mā)+ ++++++++++++++++++++++++
yathayoga+ rūp+ □dinā sa teṣām ārambaṇapratyayaḥ| ayañ ca
vidyṣmānānām {|} vā parikṣlpyetāvidyṣ(mānā)nām (vā | ta)
[P 15v2] tra vidyamānānāṁ nārthas tadārambaṇapratyayena dharmasya
hy utpattyartham ārambaṇam parikalpyeta sa cāramba □ ṇāt pūrvam
vidyamān(ā ev)+ (ti) | + nā(r)am(b)a (sv)ātmạnā pra ..
ddhe kim asyara(m)ba + (yog)+ na parikalpitenety anārambaṇa
evāyam san avidyamāno (dh)armaś cittadikaḥ kevalam sārambana ity
ucyąte bhava(dbh)ih..
[P 15v3] manīşikayā na tv asyārambaṇena kaścit sambandho sti
athāvidyamānasyārambaṇam parikalpyate tad api na yuktam
anārambaṇa evāyam ityādi | avidyamānasya hi nāsty āra(mb)ṣṇena
yogaḥ a rambaṇa evāyam sana dharma □ upadiśyate bhavadbhiḥ
sārambaṇa iti vākyaśeṣaḥ | athānārambaṇe dharme kuta ārambaṇam
punah atha
80
The previous seven akṣaras may belong to a floating piece of leaf.364
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
[P 15v4] śabdaḥ praśne ({h}) kuta iti hetau tenāyam arthaḥ| athaivam
anārambaṇe dharme 'saty avidyamāne bhūyaḥ kuta āra ¦ © mbaṇam*
| ārambaṇakābhāvād ārambaṇasyāpy abhāva ity abhiprāyaḥ | kathan
tarhi sārambaṇāś cittacaittāḥ sāmvṛtam e tal lakṣaṇam na pāra-
mārthikam ity adoṣaḥ idānīm samanantarapratyayaniṣedhārtham āha
|| 0 || anu ¦
O
[P 15v5] tpanneṣu dharmeșu nirodho nopapadyate | nānantaram ato
yuktam niruddhe pratyayaś ca kaḥ tatra paścimeślokasyārddhe
pādavyatyayo draṣṭavyaḥ | caśabdaś ca bhinnakrame niruddhe ceti |
tenaivam pāṭhaḥ | niruddhe ca pratyayaḥ kaḥ | nānanta □ ram ato
yuktam iti ślokabandhārthan tv evam uktam* tatra kāra-
ṇasyānantaro nirodhaḥ kāryasyotpadapra
[P 15v6] tyayaḥ samantarapratyayalakṣaṇam | atra vicāryate | anutpa-
nneșu dharmeșu kāryabhuteṣv ankurādiṣu ni ¦ □ rodho nopapadyate
kāraṇasya bījādeḥ | yadaitad evam tadā kāraṇasya nirodhābhāvād
ankurasya kaḥ samanantarapratyayaḥ athānutpanne pi kārye
bijanirodha iṣyate | evam sati niruddhe bije 'bhāvībhūte 'nkurasya ka
[P 15v7] ḥ pratyayaḥ ko vā bījanirodhasya pratyaya iti | ubhayam etad
ahetukam ity āha | niruddhe ca kaḥ pratyaya iti caśabdo
’nutpannaśabdāpeksah | tenānutpanne cānkura bijādīnām nirodha
isyamāṇe py ubhayam etad ahetukam āpa □ dyata iti nānantaram ato
yuktam* atha vā na svato nāpi parata ityādinotpādo niṣiddhas tam
abhisa ¦
[P_16r1] ndhāyāha | anutpanneṣu dharmeșu nirodho nopapadyate
nānantaram ato yuktam iti api ca niruddhe pratyayaś ca □ ka ity atraPRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
365
O
pūrvvakam eva vyākhyānam | idānīm adhipatipratyayasvarūpa-
niṣedhārtham āha || || bhāvānām niḥsvabhāvā nām na sattā
vidyate yataḥ | satīdam asmin bhavatīty etan naivopapadyate | iha
yasmin sati yad bhavati tat tasyā
[P 16r2] dhipateyam ity adhipatipratyayalakṣaṇam* | bhāvānāñ ca
pratītyasamutpanna{}tvāt* svabhāvābhāve kutas tad ya □ sminn iti
kāraṇatvena vyapadiśyate | kutas tad yad idam iti kāryatvena | tasmān
nāsti lakṣaṇato pi pratyayasiddhiḥ atrā □ ha tantvādibhyaḥ
paṭādikam upalabhya paṭādes tantvādayaḥ pratyayā iti ucyate
paṭādiphalapravṛ
[P 16r3] ttir eva svarūpato nästi kutaḥ pratyayānām pratyayatvam
setsyati | yathā ca paṭādiphalapravṛttir asatī¦ O ti tathā pratipādayann
āha ||° || na ca vyastasamasteṣu pratyayeṣv asti tat phalam*
pratyayebhyaḥ kathan tac ca bhaven na pratyaye ṣu yat* | tatra
vyasteṣu tantuturi{|}vematasaraśalākādiṣu pratyekam pato nasti
tatrānupalabhyamānatvāt*
[P_16r4] kāraṇabahutvāt* kāryabahutvaprasangāt* | samuditeṣv api
tantvādiṣu nāsti patah pratyekam avayaveṣv a vidyamanatvāt*
ekasya kāryasya khandaśa utpattiprasangat* tasmāt phalābhāvān na
santi pratyayāḥ svabhāvata iti || || athasad api ta{}n tebhyaḥ
pratyayebhyaḥ pravarttate phalam ity abhiprāyaḥ syāt* pratyayeṣv
api nāsti pha
[P_16r5] lam iti | apratyayebhyo pi vīraṇādibhyaḥ kasmān nābhi-
pravarttate pața iti nāsti phalapravṛttiḥ sva ¦ □ rūpataḥ | atrāha | yady366
DIPLOMATIC EDITION MS P
anyat (ph)alam syā{i}³¹d anye ca prą(ty)a +(ā)s tadā kim pratyayeṣu
phalam asti nās+ī .i syāc cintā | nāsti tu vya □ tiriktam phalam kin
tarhi pratyayam ayam eveti | ucyate || 0 || phalañ ca pratyayam ayam
pratyayāś cā.. yam...
O
[P 16r6] mayāḥ phalam asvamayebhyo yat tat pratyayamayam katham
yadi pratyayamayaṁ pratyayavikāraḥ phalam iti vyava ¦ ■ .thāpyate
tad ay+ ktam (y)+ .(ā)t t(e) pi pratyayā asva .. +++++ (y)a(s)+ + vā
ity a(r)thah tan+ ma +(0) hi pața ity ucyate syāt pato yadi tantava
eva svabhāvasiddhāḥ syus te hy a(s)u(m)ayā a. (v)ikārā na
svąbhāva .i ..++ (ś cạ) te .. (o) ’svayam
[P_16r7] mayebhyo yat phalam paṭākhyam tat katham tantumayam
bhavis(y)a +iyathok+am patah kāraṇataḥ siddhaḥ sid+ + + + + + +
+i +ir+ ++++ +++++++++++++++ yạmayam (ph)ạ ..
.. vi(d)yate apratyayamayam tarhy astu napratyayamayam pha-
lam samvidyata iti | tan(tu)mayo yadā paṭo nāsti (tad)ā kąthạ+ viru-
ddho
[P 16v1] vīraṇamayaḥ syāt* a{|}trāha | mā bhūt phalam pra-
tyayāpratyayan+ .. mạs tu vidyạte | tathā ca bhavān* bravīti | yady asat
phala+ .. (ty)ay(e)bhyaḥ p+ + (rtt)ạte | apratyay+ bhy(o) p(i) (k)ạ + +
+++++++|nạ (c)ąsạti phale (p)ạ + + tākhy+ tạntuvīranānā(m)
(p)ratya ¦ □ yānā(m) pratyayatvam yuktam ataḥ phalam a(p)y a .tī(t)i |
(u) +yate syāt pha .am yadi pratyayāpra(t)yayā eva sy+(h) + ti hi .. la
il
81 The scribe wrote di.PRASANNAPADÃ CHAPTER ONE
367
[P 16v2] me 'sya pratyaya ime 'pratyayā iti syāt* | tac ca vicārya-
māṇa(m) nāstīti phalābhāvāt* pratyayāpratyayāḥ kutaḥ pratyayāś
cāpratyayāś ceti (sa)māsaḥ | + + + +t+ bhāvānā+ svabhāvataḥ
samutpatti .iti || º || yathoktam ārya ¦ □ ratnākarasūtre | śūnyavidya na
hi vi .. (t)e .. +i + +(t)a .ī(ksi) (ś)ạ .u(n)asya (v)ā padạm* | ya .. (vi) .. +i
++.. (t)ah (kv)aci:
|
[P 16v3] t* so na jātu parahetu bheṣyati yasya naiva hi sabhāvubhā
labhyate{h |} so 'svabhāvu parapratyayaḥ katham | asvabhā¦ □ vu
paru kim janīsyatī eṣa hetu sugatena deśitaḥ sa +(v)ą dharmma acalā
dṛḍha sthitā nirvikāra nirupadravāḥ śivāḥ antarīkṣa pathatulya
jānakā atra muhyati jagam ajānakam | śailaparvvata yathā akampiyā
eva dha +ma + + + + (yāḥ) ¦
[P 16v4] sadā | no cyavanti na pi copapadyayū eva dharmata jinena
deśita | ityādi | tathā yo na pi jāyati no cupa Ⓒ padyī na cyavate na pi
jiryati dharmaḥ tañ jinu deśayatī narasimhas tatra niveśayi
satvaśatāni yasya svabhāvu na vidyatikaścin no parabhāvatu
kenaci labdhaḥ | nāntarato pi na bāhir ato vā labhyati tatra niveśayi
na(th)ah santa ¦
[P 16v5] ga{{}}tī kathitā sugatena no ca gatī upalabhyati kañcit* tatra
ca vyāharasī gatimukto muktaka mocayasī bahusatvān iti vistaraḥ
O
|| 0 || ācāryacandrakīrttipādoparacitāyām prasannapadāyām madhya-
kavṛttau pratyayaparīkṣā nā □ ma prathamam prakaraṇam ||